1 :Thrice seven are the entities which bear, wear and comprise the entire world of forms in existence. May Vachaspati, omniscient lord of speech, awareness and the phenomenal world bless me with the body of knowledge pertaining to their essences, names, forms, powers, functions and relationships here and now. 
2 :Note: The 'thrice-seven' of phenomenal world is to be explained: The phenomenal world is an evolution of one basic material cause, Prakrti or Nature. The efficient cause of the evolution is Vachaspati, Supreme Spirit, immanent, transcendent, omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent. The evolution is initiated and sustained by the will and presence of the spirit immenant implosive in Nature, therefore it is creative and intelligent evolution, not blind and wild growth. The initiation is like the spark, the Big Bang. With the big bang the one basic material cause, Prakrti, takes on the evolutionary process of diversification. The phenomenal world, whatever it may be at any time, is the consequence of that one cause according to the laws of evolution. 
3 :Prakrti originally is non-descript. When the divine will initiates the process of evolutionary change and development, it takes on the name and character of M ahat. M ahat then changes into Ahankara, a generic identity, which then evolves into two directions: physical and psychic. The psychic direction develops into the mind, intellect and the senses and the physical develops into the five elements, akasha, vayu, agni, apah and Prthivi. 
4 :The physical development passes through two stages, subtle and gross from Ahankara. The subtle elements are called Tanmatras, and Tanmatras then develop into the gross elements, akash or space, vayu or energy, agni or heat and light, apah or liquids, and Prthivi or solids. 
5 :The five gross el ements, their subtle precedents, and A hankara are the' seven' of the mantra. 
6 :These seven entities, further, have their qualitative character. All phenomenal forms have their qualitative characteristics. Even human beings have qualitative, characteristic differences. A person may be intellectually very high, a research oriented introvert, another an energetic playful extrovert, still another may be dull. Why this? N ature, the basic material cause of our physical existence, itself has its qualitative modes and variants. These are Satva (mind, intellect, transparency), Rajas (energy, activeness), and Tamas (matter, inertia). We may call them thought, energy and matter, or, matter, motion and mind. That matter and energy, and even mind, are interconvertible is a very late scientific rediscovery of a Vedic truth, or it may just be a reminder of something we had forgot, though actually it was lying deposited in a dormant account. 
7 :The seven variants of Prakrti into one direction of evolution, further qualified and characterised by these three qualitative modes, makes the phenomenal forms into thrice seven. A great intellectual with an agitated mind may be a great destroyer, another great intellectual with a balanced mind may be a great creative innovator. Thetwo arehuman physically, yet different in character and achievement. 
8 :Prayer: May Vachaspati enlighten us about these thrice seven. This is the Atharva-vediya projection of knowledge and education. This is the prayer for our intelligential development in terms of facts, processes and values. 
9 :O Vachaspati, lord of phenomenal world, giver of knowledge and power, wealth and value, come and bring me a brilliant holy mind, stop not the process, and whatever I hear, let it stay with me. 
10 :Here itself, in the process of learning and teaching, let both teacher and disci pie be at the optimum tension of joyous instruction likethe string at both ends of the bow. May Vachaspati lead on in the discipline. What I hear and learn, let it stay with me. (The word 'ubhe', both, has also been interpreted as 'knowledge and know I edge-based action in top condition'.) Invoked is Vachaspati, may Vachaspati give us the call and inspiration. Letusfollow and practicewhat we have heard and confirmed. Do not lose, do not disvalue, never revile what you have learnt. 
11 :We know the shara's father, abundant all sustaining Parjanya, water bearing cloud in the firmament, and its mother, fertile all bearing Prthivi, earth, too we know well. 
12 :(Shara is a reed which has great medicinal qualities. It is also an arrow, a weapon of defence, victory and freedom. It is also interpreted as a son, a brave youthful hero. And the hymn celebrates victory over illness, enemies, and the difficulties of life.) O jyaka, earth, mother, bow string, develop us and build our body, the social system, the nation, to the strength of adamant and steel. Strong as you are, eliminate the jealous and the enemies, the niggards and the frustraters. 
13 :When the bow strings of the warriors, strung by the ends of the bow at optimum tension, shoot the sharp and deadly whizzing arrows, then, O mighty warrior, O commander, O Indra, intercept and throw off the enemy's missiles far from us. 
14 :O ruler, O physician, O teacher, just as sharp catalytic light energy abides in heaven, on earth and in the firmament and destroys antilife elements, similarly let the power of the arrow, the medicinal munja grass, the twisted munja girdle of the disciple, strengthen and protect humanity's security and peace, health of the individual and society, and the intellectual and moral health of the disciple against evil, weakness, disease and wasteful flow out. 
15 :We know the progenitor of Shara, nature's energy of health and vigour, Parjanya, the abundant cloud of a hundredfold vigour and vitality. Thereby I bring health of body and equanimity of mind to you. Let there be the infusion of energy, protection of health and cleansing of the body system without delay hereon earth. 
16 :We know the progenitor of Shara, M itra, profuse pranic energy of nature of a hundredfold vigour and vitality. Thereby I bring you health of body and peace of mind. Let there be the infusion of vigour, protection of health and cleansing of the body system on earth without delay. 
17 :We know the father of Shara, Varuna, nature's water energy of a hundredfold vigour and vitality. Thereby I bring you health of body and peace of mind. Let the infusion of vigour, protection of health and cleansing of the body system be here itself on earth without delay. 
18 :We know Shara's father, the Moon, its profuse herbal energy of a hundredfold vigour and vitality. Thereby I bring you health of body and tranquillity of mind. Let there be infusion of health and vigour, protection of vitality and cleansing of the system here on earth without delay. 
19 :We know Shara's father, the sun, of a hundredfold virility.Thereby I bring you health of mind and body with peace and tranquillity. Let there be infusion of vigour, protection of health and cleansing of the system here itself on earth without delay. 
20 :Whatever stays collected in your intestines, in urinary ducts and in the bladder, let it be thus released all at once. 
21 :I remove the obstruction, open the urethra and release the flow. Let the urine flow free all at once. 
22 :The mouth of your bladder is open like a flood of the sea. Let the urine then flow free all at once. 
23 :Just as the arrow shot and rel eased from the bow flies forth far, so let the urine flow free all at once. 
24 :mothers and loving sisters of humanity, performing the soma yajna of their life of love and non-violence, flow on by their divine paths on the vedi of life mixing the waters of living vitality with the sweets of honey and soma of joyous living for us. 
25 :And may those waters which are close to the sun, and in the sun itself, with which the sun nourishes life, flow and advance our yajna of life with energy and enthusiasm without violence. 
26 :I invoke those divine waters sucked up by the sun's rays which shower for our rivers, where our lands and cowsfind nourishment and whereby we create holy materials for our yajna. 
27 :health and medicinal efficacy in the waters. A nd by the admirable nourishing values of waters, horses become strong and rush to victory, cows become fertile, lands become rich. 
28 :Apah, liquid energies of nature, you are creators and givers of peace and joy. Pray inspire us for the achievement of food and energy for body, mind and soul so that we may realise and enjoy the mighty splendour of divinity within and without. 
29 :Let us share here itself in body that nectar sweet of yourswhich is most blissful, pray nourish usasloving mothers feed their children. 
30 :enlightenment, we come to you without delay for the promotion and stability of which you move and impel people and powers and for which you invigorate us too. Pray bless us with vigour and vitality. 
31 :Sovereign givers of the cherished gifts of health against avoidable ailments, harbingers of peace and settlement with elimination of wasting diseases, O waters of life, I pray for your gifts of sanatives, health and bliss of well being. 
32 :May the divine waters be for our peace and bliss of our cherished desire and bring us showers of peace, protection and blessedness with freedom from ill health and disease. 
33 :Soma, the moon and the herbs, creates and shows, and the physician too tells me, that there is universal medicine in the waters for us. And the waters, universal medicine, also create the vital heat of life which is the universal sustainer of us all. 
34 :O waters, give me the best sanative for my body's health for a long life, so that I may see the sun, universal light, every day for a long long time. 
35 :May waters of the desert regions be good and auspicious. May waters of the lakes and marshy lands be good and auspicious for us. May waters of wells and tanks be good and auspicious for us. May waters stored in pots and jars and coolers be good and auspicious for us. And may waters collected from rain be good and auspicious for us. May waters destroy germs, viruses and ailments and promote good health. 
36 :RefulgentAgni, ruler and commander, round up the malignant, crafty, flatterer, go getter who does not value life. You alone, honoured and celebrated, are the destroyer of negative, antisocial evil forces of cruelty and destruction. 
37 :Seated in the highest position, all knowing, self controlled, Agni, taking measured and balanced part of ghrta from us, objective and balanced in judgement of what you receive, punish the negatives and make them repent. 
38 :Let the antisocial forces that sneer, chatter, disvalueand eat up the resources of society lament, and then you and Indra, wielders of the bolt of justice and punishment, pray accept our homage for the nation's social yajna. 
39 :LetAgni take the lead in cleansing, and then let Indra take over with his force of arms, impel, compel and correct them so that all the negative mischief mongers come up and confess: Here I am, and I am sorry: O Jataveda, all knowing Agni, watcher and guide of all people, none can escape your eye. Pray chastise the negative social elements among us so that al I of them, tormented by the chastisement al ready, come before you and openly say this: We are sorry. We stand corrected. 
40 :J ataveda, refulgent Agni, brilliant ruler, start off the process of cleansing. You are born and risen to your eminence for our collective good and joint progress. Having been our representative and the messenger of our will, punish, correct and eliminate the evil. Let them wail and repent. 
41 :Agni, round up and bring here the evil doers caught and bound. And if it is otherwise inevitable, let Indra, even with his thnderbolt of justice and power, eliminate their incorrigible heads. 
42 :Let this havi, holy submission (of relevant material, investigation report, etc., in theyajnic social management and administration), bring up the saboteurs to book like a rushing stream that brings up the foam, and whoever the man or woman that has committed the foul act must come up here and respestfully present his or her explanation of the case to the ruling authority. 
43 :This man is come submitting to authority. Take him, O Brhaspati, high priest of law, and having taken him under control of law, send him to Agni and Soma, commit him to prosecution and defence for justice and proper dispensation. 
44 :O Somapa, presiding power of peace and law and order, eliminate the saboteurs and the antisocial damagers, and counsel, guide and lead their followers onto the path of positive and creative living. Bring down their pride and insubordination to submission to law and acceptance of authority and remove their lowest spirit of frustration, despair and oppression, now that the defaulter respects and honours you. 
45 :Agni, enlightened and fiery leader and ruler, strong with power and force, knowing all the facts and problems of the nation, as you know the generation, rise and growth of these saboteurs and damagers open or underground, ward off and eliminate their mischief of a hundredfold variety, also saving and raising their humanity as far as possible with sacred counsel and knowledge of positive value. 
46 :May the Vasus, divine powers of nature and humanity, givers of peace, settlement and brilliance, Indra, lord Supreme, Pusha, giver of nourishment and growth, Varuna, the ocean, M itra, the sun, Agni, vital heat and fire, Adityas, all phases of the sun, and Vishvedevas, over-all generosity of life, vest this man, this ruler, seeker and aspirant, with wealth, honour and excellenceand establish him inthehigh realms of divine light. 
47 :O Devas, enlightened leaders of humanity, let the energy of light and education for enlightenment, solar energy, fire energy, and all the golden assets of the nation be under the direction and control of this our ruler. Let all our adversaries be under our control. Raise this ruler and his rule to the heights of the highest heavenly light on earth. 
48 :O Jataveda, lord omniscient over all wealth, power and excellence of existence, by the universal light and knowledge with which you bear and bring all the power and nourishments of body, mind and soul for Indra, spirit of humanity, by the same light and knowledge, O Agni, lord self-refulgent, exalt this man, this aspirant, this ruler, and instal him at the highest merit and virtue among his fellow beings. 
49 :O lord omniscient and self-refulgent, Agni, I take on the rule and governance of the yajna of these people's social order, their lustre and grandeur, their wealth, growing assets and their common will. Pray, let our adversaries be under the rule of our order, and raise this commonwealth to the heights of enlightenment and heavenly glory on earth. 
50 :This Varuna, immanent and transcendent cosmic spirit of justice, love and law, life giver of all devas, vibrant powers of nature and humanity, shines and rules over all. The bonds and bounds of this self-refulgent ruler are ever true and inviolable. Therefore, enlightened, energised and refined by the infinite knowledge and vision of the power and passion of this refulgent omnipotent saviour and protector, I raise this man, this ruler, this self, above the carnal mind to freedom of spirit within the bounds of divine law above the bonds and snares of the arrestive punitive law. 
51 :Homageto you, Varuna, refulgent Iord and ruler of the world, and salutations to your power and passion for love, justice and rectitude. O formidable lord of law and retribution, you know all the jealous and malignant forces of the world. I driveand inspireathousand others together to follow the path of rectitude, and so I pray bless this devotee of yours that he may live a full hundred years. Pray bless me that I may inspire others. 
52 :O man, whatever untrue or evil, much or otherwise, you have spoken with your tongue, I have you released by the grace of Varuna, lord ruler and ordainer of Truth and Dharma (if you dedicate yourself to Truth and Dharma in thought, word and deed). 
53 :O man, I release you from the fear and terror of Varuna, mighty master and leader of humanity, and from the boundless bottomless ocean of existence. O formidable lord, speak to our fellow men of the universal Veda and receive and accept our devotion and prayer. 
54 :O Pusha, spirit of life's procreation, for the expectant mother, may every thing be good and auspicious in this child birth. MayAryama, creative law of nature, hota, the father, Vedha, the specialist physician, all be good and helpful and auspicious. May the mother give birth to the baby comfortably. May she relax all over her body system. 
55 :Four are the directions and subdirections of heaven, four are the directions of the earth. All the divinities feed, develop and move the foetus, and they open up the body system and the foetus on maturity for the birth. 
56 :Let the parturient woman open up, let the maternity staff relax the system for the birth. O mother, relax, let the procreative system open up and deliver the baby. 
57 :The cover of the foetus is not stuck in the flesh, nor in the fat, nor in marrow. Let the thin spotted sheet after birth be out for dogs to eat. 
58 :I, physician surgeon, open up your urinary passage, open up the passage of delivery from the womb and separate apart the two parts of the groin. I separate the mother and the baby from the afterbirth. Let the placenta descend. 
59 :As the wind blows, as the mind moves, as birds fly, so you, O ten month mature baby, move and come with the placenta. Let the afterbirth descend. 
60 :The first, born of the sheath of life in the dark womb, itgoesforward into life, clad intheraysof light, overflowing, wind impelled, thundering with rain, shattering, straight on, the one living force moving three ways. Benevolent power? May it bless our physical existence. Malevolent? May it spare us in body and mind. 
61 :Note: This is a mysteriously comprehensive verse in its symbolism. The first one born of 'Jara', life sheath in the womb, has been interpreted as the cosmic spirit born of, i.e., manifested from, the darkness darker than the darkest of the Nasadiya sukta of Rgveda, 10, 129,3 and Devatmashakti of ShvetashvataraUpanishad 1, 3, Svagunair-nigudha, covered under its own primordial potential. It is also interpreted as the sun manifested from the womb of night at dawn or also appearing from the thick cover of dark clouds. It is also i nterpreted as the cloud of rain born of w i nd and vapour electrified by thunder. In continuance of the earlier hymn, it is interpreted as the baby. And later it is also interpreted as natal disease born of exposure to sun, wind and rain. Hence the interpretation of 'mrdati': Benevolent power? Bless us. M alevolent? Spare us. 
62 :As you pervade every limb with powerful presence, we acknowledge you and offer proper homage. The power which holds every part of the body and all the systems of the body of this child together, we honour, and we present the homage of right order. 
63 :O physician, curethischild of headacheand any other ailment of the brain. Free him from cough and congestion that has affected every limb and every joint of its body. Whatever ailment is caused by the rainy season, or by wind, or by heat and dryness may be cured by resort to nature's greenery, forests and mountains. 
64 :May there be health and well being for the upper parts of my body system. May there be peace and well being for the lower parts of my body system. May there be good health for all the four parts of my body. May there be peace, good health and total well being for the whole body, mind and soul of my life system. 
65 :O lord omnipotent, homage to you for electric energy, homage to you for thunder energy, homage to you for the energy that strikes like a deadly bolt, and for that which attracts and repels and conducts itself to the targets and into the absorbent materials, and by which you strike at the enemy. 
66 :Homage to you, electric energy of the fall and flood and to the source whence you collect your power and heat. O centre of the energy and power of existence, be kind to our body's health and bring us peace and well being for our future generations. 
67 :Homage to you, energy of the fall and flood, homage to the force of your strike and the heat we create and collect. We know too the highest and ultimate source, the origin, where you lie hidden in the depth of spatial ocean at thecentreof the universe whence flows the energy and the very being of existence. 
68 :O divine energy w hom al I forces of nature create and divine intellectuals of humanity inculcate, producing inviolable power, arrows like, to shoot at the negative forces in existence in nature and humanity, pray you, praised, honoured and applied, be kind and gracious to us in our battle of life. To you, O divine mother, Shakti, all hail, all homage! I love and honour the beauty, dignity and brilliance of this bride and I declare I accept her for wife as a garland of flowers culled from aspring garden in bloom, and may she, like a mighty mountain broad and deep at the base, stay firm and live a long longtime among my father, mother and seniors of the family. 
69 :O brilliant bridegroom dedicated to disciplined family life, this bride is now the wife for you as yama, her husband to lead her home, and may she live bound to her new home of your father, mother and brother, now hers too in the family. 
70 :O brilliant bridegroom, this bride—we now give her hand unto you as wife— is now a member support of your family. May she live a long life among her new parents and seniors, and may she by her thoughts, words and mind contribute to the peace and welI being of your family. 
71 :By the word and law of the free, all wise, all watching adorable lord of the universe, I bind together your life and good fortune, dignity and prosperity together, yours, O bride, and yours, O bridegroom, and just as women tie up and safeguard the treasure chest of the family, so together you too safeguard the honour and dignity of the family. 
72 :Let the streams of water join together, they would flow together as rivers, let currents of wind blow together, and together they blow as storms, let birds fly together, and they fly as bird power in unity. Let brilliant men join thisyajna of mine and conduct it together as a joint power, a nation. I perform this yajna with the oblations of liquid ghrta from different streams in unison. 
73 :(Diversity and unity are two sides of the same one reality, root and branches of the same one tree. It is theunity of the seed andtherootof thetreewhich bears and holds and sustains the diversity of branches and leaves together, it is not the other way round. In our world, world economy isoneyajna, national economies are oblations into the same one world vedi. One world, one economy, no enemy in the same one community of humanity. Dream? Distant? Hence the leading performer calls upon the Pradivah, leading lights of world vision, O people of the world, confluent and cooperative powers ail, leading lights of voice and vision, come at my call, join this yajnic world order and develop and raise it to the heights. Let all living beings, all living resources, join it together here itself, let all wealth of the world abide herein itself. 
74 :W hichever abundant and inexhaustible streams of world economy flow together in this world order, by all those confluent streams we jointly augment the growth and dynamic stability of the world community for me, i.e., the one spirit of world order, for ourselves. 
75 :water in the form of world resources, by all those streams we augment and raise the world's wealth together for ourselves. 
76 :Those thieves and robbers who join in gangs and proceed in dark moonless night and attack others to rob them of their wealth are suckers. Let Agni, government power of peace and security, destroyer of evil at the fastest, warn us against these. 
77 :Varuna, powers of law and order, speak of the efficiency of lead. By lead, Agni, fire power, protects the people. May Indra, the ruling power, give me the lead for protection. O dear friend, lead is the destroyer of antisocials, thieves and robbers. 
78 :Lead (bullet) challenges and destroys hosts of enemies, it stems, throws off and destroys ogres, by this, man can control and subdue all the demonic forces that arise in society. 
79 :If you hurt or kill our cow or horse, and if you kill our fellow human or destroy our man power, we fix you by a lead bullet so that you would cease to be a destroyer of our brave. 
80 :Let those blood vessels which circulate blood in the body stop, having lost their vigour like sisters who have lost their glow for want of their brothers. 
81 :one, you too stop. The smallest one has stopped. And let the large vessel stop too. 
82 :Of the hundreds of arteries and thousands of veins, let the middle ones stop, and then at the end let all of them stop together (and when the surgery is done, let all of them resume the flow as normal). 
83 :A mong you and above you is a bow shaped large one, abundant in blood, stopped by presence of sediment. Let all now work at peace (after the treatment). 
84 :We uproot poverty, wantonness, malignity and adversity, and we procure all those things which are good for our children and future generations. Thus do we plan and manage our prosperity against adversity. 
85 :May Savita, cosmic creator's natural inspiration and the parents in the home, Varuna, M itraandAryama, the teacher and our innate human sense of judgement and discrimination between truth and falsehood and between freedom and responsibility (Varuna), our friends and peer group and our sense of love and friendship with our rational sense of justice and reason (M itra), and our passion for progress with our sense of purpose, direction and destination for life's values (Aryama), may all these along with Anumati, creative wisdom, and the 'Devas', brilliant and generous divinities of nature and the wise and great people of the world, root out our sloth, negativity and adversity and inspire us with enthusiasm for the achievement of a dynamic peace and balanced prosperity. (This is our prayer as a prelude to planning and prosperity against adversity.) Whatever is forbidding, fearsome and ferocious in your body, mind and soul, or in your head and hair and in your behaviour, all that we transform positively with our word of divine love and wisdom. O man, we pray, may Lord Savita, giver of life and light of wisdom inspire you and raise you to maturity and perfection for success in life. 
86 :We remove from our midst offensive movements, arrogance and bullying, violentcursing and swearing, bellow breathing, chattering and flattering, and pretentious delicacy of manners and behaviour. (We care for the manners and behaviour of a civilised society.) Deadly enemies must not reach us. Deadly enemies ranged all round must never reach us. Indra, mighty ruler, control, dispose and destroy all those missiles which are directed at us. Cast them away, far from us. 
87 :Let all the missiles fall far away from us, those that are shot and those which are directed to be shot at us. Let all the missiles whether manual or mechanical and super human fall upon and fix our enemies. 
88 :Whoever that's our own within, or an enemy outside, our own kin or alien that plans to enslave us, let Rudra, terrible commander of our forces, fix and destroy these enemies of ours by the strike of his missiles. 
89 :Whoever is our rival, adversary and enemy, and any one who is not an enemy but hates and curses us, let all devas, brilliant sages and intellectuals, reprimand and shake him down. M y ultimate strength and defence is within, divine knowledge and vision: Brahma jnana. 
90 :None shall violate the dignity and sanctity of our women. O Soma, ruler, lover of peace and commander of power, let M aruts, stormy troops of our defence forces, protect and promote us in this yajnic social order. Let no enemy, no despicable maligner, no wicked man, nor hater approach and touch us in the self-government of the social order. 
91 :Today the fatal weapon of malignant sin and evil is raised and roars with all its force. O M itra and Varuna, ruling powers of love and justice, you both ward it off from us. 
92 :From here and from there, whatever deadly weapon is raised against us, O Varuna, lord supreme of power and justice, that you ward off, and give us peace and happy settlement of great and highest order. Pray ward off the deadly weapon. 
93 :I ndra, ruler supreme, you are so great, destroyer of unfriendly powers and assailants, unconquered and inviolable whose friend and ally is never hurt, never defeated, never destroyed. 
94 :Giver of felicity and well being of life, ruler, protector and promoter of the people, destroyer of evil, darkness and ignorance, shatterer of enemies, controller and manager of all powers and forces of the world, generous and virile Indra, ruler of the world, may, we pray, go forward and, as harbinger of the soma peace and pleasure of life, bless us with freedom from fear in a free and fearless environment. 
95 :O ruler, I ndra, destroy our enemies, throw down the warriors of violence and destruction, take down to bottomless darkness all those forces which plan and strike us to enslave us. 
96 :Indra, destroy the forces of negativity and destruction, eliminate violence, hate and enmity, break the jaws of evil and darkness. O destroyer of darkness and evil, break down the pride and passion of enmity and of the enemies of freedom who subject people to slavery. 
97 :Indra, overcome the plan and mind of the jealous. Throw out the deadly weapon of the violator of life. Give us peace, freedom and felicity of high order and great possibilities. Eliminate the deadly weapon and strike of even the highest calibre of the enemy. 
98 :Let your heart trouble and paleness of body (anaemia) go off by the rising sun. We wrap you round with the crimson red of sun rays and feed you on the fruit and flowers of shalmali, the silk-cotton tree (salmalia malabarica). 
99 :We treat you with foods, pastes and radiations of crimson red so that you may be free from pallor and heart affliction to live a long healthy life. 
100 :We treat you with the divine rays of the sun which are crimson red, with whatever else also is crimson red, such as milk of crimson red cows, paste of crimson red herbs, of any form and every age. 
101 :We treat you by removing your paleness by exposure to fresh gardens, fruits and flowers, and soothing and healing salves of acacia, Zizyphus and yellow sandal. 
102 :O herb, night born you are, energised by the moon. O Rama, Krishna, Asikni, soothing, dark and dusky species of Rajani, Curcuma Longa, cure this white leprosy of the patient and give colour where it has been lost to whiteness. 
103 :The leprotic, the white, the spotted, cure all. Remove the whites so that the original skin colour is restored and the patient is cured. 
104 :Your capacity to dissolve and resolve is unlimited. Your capacity to absorb is unlimited. O Asikni, such you are, remove all the white spots from this patient. 
105 :Whatever of leprosy in the skin is born of the bone, in whatever is born of other parts of the body caused by physical imbalance of the system, I cure and eliminate by Brahma according to scientific formula. 
106 :N ote: Panditj ayadev in his commentary on this sukta explains in detail the specific herbs covered by the general terms Nakta, Rama, Krishna, Asikni, Rajani and Brahma according to Dhanvantari, famous physician of I ndia and supposed founder of the science of Ayurveda. Correspondingly, Charaka is known to be the surgeon. 
107 :First born, first cure, is Suparna, the sun. You, O earth and moon, O Rajani, receive the life energy of the sun. T hat wonderful I ife energy, A suri, received from interaction of the sun, moon and earth through photo synthesis, creates the many forms of herbs and trees. 
108 :That wonderful life energy, A suri, forms and creates this herbal remedy for skin leprosy, this destroyer of skinny white, thisSarupa. It certainly destroys leprosy and makes the skin uniform in colour. 
109 :O herb, Sarupa, the earth, uniform and unifunctional, is your mother. Uniform and unifunctional surely is your father, the sun. You too are uniform and unifunctional in action. A s such, make the skin of this patient uniform in colour. 
110 :Shyama, maker of uniform colour and function of the patient's skin, born and sustained of the earth, cure this patient. Create and re-create the form and colour of the skin, the same uniformly, again and again. 
111 :Note: In the Vedic tradition herbs and medicines are not dead materials. They share the same vitality of the cosmic spirit and energy which all of us share. They are a part of the living cosmic organism. Hence the Vaidic physician talks to them as living energy. Secondly, everything from cosmic energy and the sun to a herb and a drug is uniform. Disintegrate presences such as diseases are malfunctions which are results of local imbalances. Hence the remedy is called Sarupa, uniform and unifunctional. The cosmic energy, the sun, the earth, the herbs, you and I, all are Sarupa in the healthy state. When the health is disturbed, the Sarupa medicine restores the 'sarupa', uniformity. Further, Suparna, Asuri, Sarupa, Shyama, Rajani, Savarani, all these are names of herbs in Ayurveda. 
112 :O Takman, painful fever, where the sustainers of the body, three humors of the body: vata, pitta and cough (wind, bile and phlegm), and seven constituents of physique: rasa or chyle, rakta or blood, mansa or flesh, meda or fat, asthi or bone, majja or marrow and virya or semen, hold their centre in the heart and in the navel and perform their function for the system, there they say is the seat of your origin. There you enter and arise and heat up and burn the fluids of the body system. O knowledgeable physician, uproot and throw out the fever. 
113 :O fever, whether you are burning as flame of fire, or you are drying and scorching the body, or your presence spreads through every part of the body system with shivers all over, your name is Hrudu, power and fire of fever, malaria, typhoid, cause of pallor and anaemia. Let the knowledgeable physician uproot and throw out the fever from us. 
114 :O fever, whether you glow as a flame in a part of the body or burn all over intensely with pain, or you are caused by stagnant waters in the realm of Varuna, water element of nature in the body or in the environment, you are Hrudu by name, a version of anaemia, pallor of jaundice. Let the knowledgeable physician uproot and throw you out of the body and the environment. 
115 :Homage of recognition with food and medication for the patient who suffers from fever with cold and shivers, for hrudu, fever with heat and burning, fever which persists every day, which comes on alternate days, which comes on after every two days, or which comes after every three days. H omage and good bye to all of them. 
116 :O Devas, potent forces of offence and defence, may that attack you launch upon the enemy be far from us. May that thunderous missile you shoot fall far off from us. 
117 :May that generous man be our friend, may Indra, the ruler, Bhaga, nature's and human spiritof prosperity be our friend. May Savita, lord of life and wondrous giver of light, be our friend. 
118 :O M aruts, children of energy, mighty warriors, blazing with lustre as the sun, who never suffer a retreat, give us peace and protection of boundless possibilities of progress. 
119 :Guide us aright, lead us to advance, be gracious, bring us peace and settlement for our body, mind and soul, bring us felicity of well being for our people and for our future generations. 
120 :Yonder there across on the shore stands the thrice seven army of the deadly enemy in battle array like cobras out of their den. Let us deal with them by the tactics of their own camouflage and shut the eyes and advance of the deadly enemies. 
121 :Let the army bearing multidirectional arms go forward, surround them and advance, tearing them down like death itself, scattering the enemy army rallied as well as re-rallied. Let the mind and morale of the evil doers break down to naught. 
122 :N either the many nor the few of the evil doers like slender sticks of cane are able to challenge us. Their Let the two columns of the army go forward, quick, fast and shining, take us to the house of the munificent master and ruler. And let the pioneering force, unconquered and unhurt lead us on back home. 
123 :Divine Agni, light and fire of nature, is come, destroyer of evil, scare of affliction, burning off and eliminating the double faced deceivers, wicked thieves, and life threatening elements of the atmosphere around. 
124 :O yajnic fire, light of divine sun, burn up constantly and instantly the infectious afflictions, cancerous germs and life threatening viruses. O fire of flames reaching into the darkest corners, burn up all the evil destroyers hiding around in the unknown places too. 
125 :Whatever force, enemy, negativity and infection within or from outside, with its own destructive action, has become a curse for us, whatever has planted itself as a fast growing killer disease, or whatever natal disease afflicts our new born baby and consumes its vitality of life, may all that disease, affliction and negativity be self-consuming to cause its own end. 
126 :Let the f i re and I ight of yaj ni c treatment convert the afflictive germs, viruses, negative cells and psychic evils into positivities so that they themselves consume and destroy their by-products, side effects, consequential developments, mutual conflicts and expansions, and thereby may all these afflictions and evils, now consuming and debilitating, be by themselves crushed, destroyed and uprooted. 
127 :O Brahmanaspati, lord of divine vision, master of knowledge and state craft for development, for the rise and progress of the nation and the republic, pray strengthen and raise us with that crystal character, jewel wealth and adamantine strength and will by virtue of which Indra, lord ruler of the world and the spirit of the human nation, rises to glory. 
128 :O Brahmanaspati, ruler and commander of the human nation, having surrounded and cornered the adversaries, selfish exploiters, whoever want to wage war against us, or who hate, envy and want to damage us, break down their force and power, subdue them and rule over them as part of the nation. 
129 :May the self-refulgent Savita, brilliant sun and the blazing commander of the defence and development forces, Soma, nation's spirit of peace and joy and the economic spirit of security, and all the people and living resources of nature and the mother land, advance and exalt you so that you may rule in a protective and promotive style for all. 
130 :This spirit of the exalted nation and this crystal character of the people is the jewel wealth of the republic, superiorto all individual constituents, subduer of jealousies and saboteurs and destroyer of the negative forces of adversaries. O Brahmanaspati, visionary high priest of the nation's law, let it be vested in me as the ruling sceptre for the common wealth's progress and for subduing of the adversaries. 
131 :As the sun there rises in heaven, so does my word of commitment arise here in the republic, so that with my word and the people's commitment and character I may eliminate enmity, subdue adversarial rivalries and rule with freedom from fear, insecurity and Eliminator of rivals and adversaries, strong and magnanimous, I dedicate myself to the nation with peace, patience and courage so that I may rightfully and righteously rule over these brave and brilliant leaders and these people to their hopes and aspirations. 
132 :O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature, leading powers of humanity, O Vasus, sustainers of life, protect and promote this man, this leader, this ruler. O Adityas, brilliancies of nature and leading lights of humanity, keep awake and alert in this living system both individual and social. Let no danger or fatal weapon, human or natural, shot by our own people from within or by an alien power, reach and touch him. (The system at the individual level is the human being, and at the social level it is the socio-political organisation, and the person to be protected and promoted is the ruler.) O Devas, divine powers of nature and humanity, noble citizens of the nation, parental seniors and their children of the younger generation, all who are supporters and protectors of the land, be alert and wide awake, and listen carefully to this word of mine: I declare and dedicate this man, this leader, this ruler to you all and commit you all for your common good to support and serve him to the last day of life. 
133 :All those, divinities which are in heaven, those on earth and those which are in the middle region, in the herbs, in all living beings, in animals and birds and in the waters, may they all bring him a full and healthy life, and may he dispel and destroy a hundred other deadly wants, problems and deprivations of life for you all. 
134 :Those among you, O noble divines, who are pioneers of research and innovation in the yajnic development of the nation, those who are yajnic followers of the pioneers, who partake of their share in the national economy of yajnic inputs and consequential fragrance and those who don't, those among you who areorganised in fiveways of national economy, all such I raise and dedicate to membership of the nation's parliament and other institutions for him. 
135 :N ow with havi we do this homage to the four immortal guardians of the four quarters of space who oversee, control and protect all forms of existence. 
136 :(The ruler guardians of the quarters of space according to Atharva Veda 3, 27, 1-6 are Agni, Indra, Varuna and Soma of the east, south, west and north, while Vishnu and Brhaspati are guardian rulers of the nether and upper directions. In the case of the human personality as well this same order of divine care is applicable, and these six versions of the power of Brahma Supreme protect us against hate, enmity and jealousy while they augment our physical, mental and spiritual potential as well.) O Devas, who are ruling guardians of the four quarters of space, you release us from the snares of adversity and save us from every form of sin and evil. 
137 :O lord transcendent of the fourth estate of the freedom of M oksha, I never tire of serving you with havi. I never give up the divine service with ghrta like a lame man giving up the journey. May the lord transcendent of spiritual freedom, protector and promoter of the regions of space, grant us the honour, excellence and glory of life. 
138 :May there be Svasti, felicity of well being, for our mother and father, felicity for our cows, our world and our peopl e. May there be total fel i city and prosperity and abundant generosity of the world for us, and let us continue, go on seeing the sun for a long long time. 
139 :O seekers, know this. Only the self-realised soul would speak of life's infinite and ultimate reality, the Spirit that is comprehended neither on the earth nor in heaven— the I ife spirit by which the forms and structures of life evolve and breathe in the expansive universe. 
140 :The main stay of these living forms is in infinite Space I ike the station of satiated self-realised souls. That home of this world of existence, they know who know, and may be they too don't - which, again, only they know, we don't. (Compare Rgveda 10,129, 7.) The living fluid vitality which the dynamic heaven and earth and the firmament created and create is the same today which has ever been flowing from the universal Spirit like the streams of water and waves of the sea. 
141 :I know the universal presiding presence all pervasive in the other, its power and vitality, immanent in Prakrti and transcending it. I offer homage and obeisance to heaven, to earth and to lord omniscient and presiding power of the universe. 
142 :The golden hued, pure and purifying primeval waters, original plastic material of existential forms, wherein manifested Savita, divine creative will, and Agni, basic vitality of life, and which, likethewomb of nature, held within the vital heat that sustains life, may, we pray, be beatific, peaceful and blissful for us. 
143 :(In relation to A pah, reference may be made to 'Samudro' arnavah' of Rgveda 1,190,1, and 'Salilam' of Rgveda 1, 129, 3, Shatapatha Brahmana 7, 5, 2, 18, andTaittiriya Brahmana 1,1, 3, 5.) Ydsdm raja varuno yati madhye satydnrte avapasyanjananbm. Yd agnim garbham dadhire suvarnastd na apah sam syond bhavantu. 
144 :I n the midst of primeval waters pervades Varuna, supreme lord of judgement who watches the truth and untruth of the life of human souls emerging into their next round of existence. The waters hold within themselves the vital heat that makes life possible and sustains it. May these waters of golden hue be full of peace, grace and bliss for us. 
145 :May the primeval waters of golden hue which evolve into many forms in space, in which the potential forms of divine existence find their food for growth, and which, likeawomb, hold within them the vital heat May these waters with immanent divinity look at me with a blissful eye. May they touch the form and complexion of my body with the softness of love. Overflowing with the ghrta of kindness and grace, pure and purifying, may they befull of peace, bliss and divine grace for us. 
146 :This herb is born of the honey sweets of earth. O sweet herb, we take you up with the honey sweet of love and gratitude. You are grown and matured by the honeyed efficacy of life and nature's evolution. Such as you are, pray sweeten our life with the honey sweet of joy and graces of culture. 
147 :(Honey, Madhu, has been interpreted as metaphor of the sweetness of existence in life, knowledge, divine awareness, indeed the soul itself. All verses of this hymn can be interpreted in this perspective. Reference may also be made to Brihadaranyakopanishad 2, 5, in which it is said that this earth and all her creatures, the waters, heat and light, wind and all other kinds of energy, the sun, the quarters of space, the moon, thunder and lightning, clouds and the sky, all space, Dharma, truth, humanity the soul and the cosmic soul, all is the honeyed expression and manifestation of divinity. And this knowledge, madhu vidya, was given by the sage Dadhyang of the Atharva tradition.) Let there be honey sweetness at the tip of my tongue. Let there be honey sweetness at the root of my tongue. O honey sweetness of divinity, always stay in my thought and will in action, and ever abide at the depth of my mind and soul. 
148 :Let my coming, going forth and going out be full of honey sweetness. Let my final exit and ultimate resort be full of honey sweetAnanda. Let me speak and express the honey sweets of love and reverence with my words, and let me share the honey sweets of divinity in my vision and response to life's experience. 
149 :I am sweeter than honey itself, sweeter than the treasure holds of honey in plants and man. O man, O sage, O divine, O love, accept me, O life, like a lovely branch bearing the honey suckle. 
150 :O love, O honeyed sweetness of life, with open expanding arms of honey sweets of love and faith I come to embrace you never to allow jealousy, bitterness or enmity to come in and vitiate our love so that you too ever abide with me in love and never forsake me. 
151 :That golden glowing discipline of life which the sages of holy life and enlightened mind hold, observe and prescribe for a life of hundredfold efficiency, I confer on you w ith commitment for a ful I age of hundred years of good health, strength of body and mind, honour and lustre. 
152 :That golden glow of discipline, demons and ogres cannot violate, nor can they challenge it. It is the splendour of divines, first born of M other Nature. One who commands this golden discipline of lifeand living with efficiency and success lives a long life among humanity. 
153 :senses and mind with self-control, so do we help this young man to bear and preserve the glow of nature's fluid energies, light of life and vigour and vitality of all the herbal essences since he conscientiously holds on to the golden discipline of continence in daily living. 
154 :We strengthen you toward completion of your personality with the vigour and vitality of life and nature over months and years season by season. May Indra, Agni and all the divinities of nature and humanity be favourable to you without reserve or hesitation. 
155 :The wise visionary realises, directly sees with the inward eye, that supreme mystery which is the centre wherein this entire universe of diversity becomes one reality of indistinguishable homageneous form as Prakrti. This world of wondrous variety, variable Prakrti receives from that centrality as the forms arise through evolution. The sages who know the supreme blissful reality dedicate themselves to It as they arise in awareness and celebrate It in words of exaltation. That's their highest act of choice. 
156 :ultimate centre of diversity, only that noble sagely scholar of immortal vision would speak who commands the language of that immortal vision and reality. Three are the stages of the manifestation of this mysterious One into existence: Creation, evolution and sustenance, and dissolution. Three are the stages of existential awareness: knowledge of discrete objects, the underlying physical laws, and the one immanent spirit of it all. Three are the stages of the evolution of inner awareness: Dharma, Dhyana and Samadhi. One who knows these three is the preceptor senior of those who claim to know. 
157 :That One is our father, generator and our brother. He knows and pervades all the worlds of the universe in existence. He alone as One comprehends the names and functions of all the divinities. He alone is the ultimate object of all research, enquiries and meditation. And all worlds of existence and all questions about the worlds of existence converge and centre into H im. 
158 :I have gone round heaven and earth (in meditation and in the cycle of existence), and now I have come to stay by the first self-manifested of the order of creative evolution, that is, H iranyagarbha, soul of the golden blue-print of the universe, who, like the Word existing at the heart of the speaker, abides all round and at the centre of the universe. This is the spirit, the light, the loving sustainer of existence, all pervasive Agni. 
159 :I have gone round all worlds and regions of the universe in order to see the universal spirit of the order of existence running I i ke the thread of the rosary hoi di ng the beads together, the spirit of the web of existence which divine sages reach, where they enjoy the immortal nectar of bliss and abide in an invariable imperishable state of divine being. 
160 :Self-refulgent, heavenly lord sustainer of the dynamic universe of stars, planets and satellites in space and of the divine voice of knowledge reverberating in space, sole and absolute master ruler and controller of the world of his creation with love and justice, is the only one supreme lord, Parameshvara, worthy of worship and homage of adoration for people. O lord of cosmic light and infinite kindness, I cometo you by the divine voice of Veda and the yogaic path of spiritual illumination. Homage and obeisance to you with total surrender. Your presence shines and is reached in the heaven of inner consciousness and the cosmic regions of divine refulgence. 
161 :Reached and realised in the regions of divine light, inner in the consciousness and outer in the cosmos, the lord adorable, self-refulgent with light of the suns, exceeds and overwhelms the light and force of the heavenly stars. May Gandharva, lord sustainer of the earth, light of the suns and theVedic voice, we pray, be kind and gracious to us. He alone is lord sustainer of the universe as father and protector, and He alone as lord supreme is to be worshipped with homage of adoration, prayer and service with yajna. 
162 :The Lord sustainer of stars and planets of the universe is immanent in the pranic energies of nature and pervades all these irreproachable forces that move in the dynamic forms of existence. Sages tell me that their home and operation is in the oceans and in the waves of energy in space, and they always continue moving in and out and thus they maintain the dynamics of life in nature as well as in humanity. 
163 :O divine energies moving with the clouds, thundering in lightning, radiant in stars, who serve the all pervasive sustainer of stars and planets, cosmicvoice and entire humanity, I offer this homage of adoration to you as manifestations of divinity. 
164 :To Apsaras, angelic vibrations of divine manifestation in nature's currents of pranic energies sustained by the concurrent presence of G andharva, Iord sustainer of the universe, manifestations loud and bold, satisfying, fulfilling, mind blowing, I offer homage of adoration. 
165 :That which showers from the cloud and streams down from the mountain to the valley as a sanative, I make into a medicine for you since it is a sanative essentially in quality. 
166 :Dear valued shower, dear valued herb, of the hundreds of sanatives, you are the best, most efficacious. You are the sure cure for ailments, you are the cure for the morbid flow. 
167 :from the valleys down. The herb stops the flow and fills up this morbid wound. This is the sure cure for the ailment, this destroys the disease. 
168 :Sea weeds collect up on the sea. That is the cure for morbid flow, and that relieves and removes the disease. 
169 :To curethischronicsorethisgreatmedicinedug out of the earth is a sure cure of the morbid flow and it destroys the disease upto the root. 
170 :May the waters be full of peace and well being of health for us. May the herbs be good and efficacious for us. Let the thunderbolt of Indra, electric force, destroy the demons of diseases and epidemics. May the arrow like rays of the sun shot from the far off solar For a long healthy life and victory in the great struggle for successful living, we progressively rising without hurting any one wear and bearthej angida jewel treated with vishkandha to counter the poisons of ill health silently working all over the body system (such as jambha, vishara and vishkandha). 
171 :May thej angida jewel of a thousand efficacies protect us from jambha, vishara, vishkandha and abhishochana (diseases which weaken, lacerate, waste away and break down the vitality and resistance of the body) and may it promote our health and vitality in every way all round. 
172 :This jangida mani challenges and eliminates vishkanadha. It wards off all those ailments which eat up the vitalities of the system. It is a panacea for health against all disease. Worn and borne, may it protect us against all evil. 
173 :By the refreshing and rejuvenating jangida sanative jewel gift given by the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, we face, challenge and subdue poisonous ill-health and all negative and destructive germs, bacteria, viruses and psychic and physical disorders in our struggle for health and well-being against disease. 
174 :May shana, hemp, and jangida protect me against vishkandha, poisonous ill health that wastes away the vitality of health. One of them, jangida, is got from the forest, and the other, shana, is obtained from the sap of herbs grown in botanical gardens. 
175 :Thisjangida mani destroys the ill effects of our sins of omission and our sins of commission, that is, from ailments caused by the mistakes we make knowingly and the mistakes we happen to make unconsciously. By itself it is challenging and resistant against evil and disease whatever the cause of the disease. May jangida help us cross over the seas of trouble to good health and a long age of fulfilment. 
176 :Indra, mighty ruler, be happy, feel exalted, go forward, brave hero, and come victorious by your mighty forces of the state which draw your chariot of governance. Drink of the soma of victory and celebration extracted and distilled by the wise, tasting the honey sweets of beauty and grace of the social order to full satisfaction for the joy of the people. 
177 :Indra, exalted leader, like a true celebrated ruler fill the treasures of the state with honey sweet assets of wealth and honour like the heavens full of light, and then may the joyous pleasures and prosperity of the happy, self-fulfilled nation with their songs of celebration reach you as their prayers and adorations reach the regions of heavenly light. 
178 :Like a self-controlled aspiring leader, Indra is a friend and instant subduer who destroys mighty clouds of darkness with his self-refulgence, breaks through the ranks of the enemy, shatters hosti Ie forces I i kea gust of scorching wind, and in the peaceablejoy and exaltation of the nation's power and prosperity overthrows the enemies of the people. 
179 :and offered reach you. Fill the treasures of the state full to their capacity. O mighty leader of performance, carry on the governance and come to us here, be with us with your best of thoughts and actions. Listen and respond to our call of invocation. Listen to my words of prayer, accept and approve. Come here with the cooperative best of your friends and carry on the ruling process for the social order and its glory. 
180 :I recite and celebrate the first and highest exploits of Indra, lord of the thunderbolt of justice and dispensation, refulgent ruler, exploits which he, like the sun, performs with the shooting rays of his light of glory. H e breaks down the clouds of darkness, want and evil, releases the waters and opens the paths of streams of mountains and the channels of social energy. (The ruler breaks down the enemies holding up the energies of the nation for movement, releases the energies and resources of the nation and carves out the paths of progress.) Indra, lord of the shooting rays of glory, breaks the clouds of life resting in the firmament and the mountain. Tvashta, divine creative power making fine forms and subtle energies, creates thewhizzing catalytic power for him as his shooting rays against the cloud. And like mother cows eager for the calves rushing to the stalls, creative, life-giving waters instantly rush over the land to the sea. 
181 :Indra, generous lord of showers, receives and internalises the vital essences present in three regions of the universe, heaven, earth and sky. The sun, glorious possessor of light, takes up the thunderbolt of electric energy, and strikes and breaks up the first born of the clouds of vapour. So does the ruler rule, destroys the enemies and hoarders, and releases the nation's creativity. 
182 :Hey Agni, refulgent leader, giver of enlightenment, let all seasons and years, sages and all words and laws of Dharma true in the context of all time and place advance and exalt you equally and continuously. Shine with the light of divinity and i 11 umi nate al I the four di recti ons and regi ons of the world dominion. 
183 :O light of life, fire of yajna, enlightened leader, rise and shine for the bliss of life. Enlighten, advance and raise this humanity. Stay high to maintain the height and glory of human good fortune in the light divine. Thosewho come close to you would never behurt. May the devotees of light, Dharma and truth rise to honour and glory. Those others who neglect the light of truth and Dharma and shun the fire of yajna would not rise. 
184 :Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge, these Brahmanas, dedicated scholars of divinity, choose to elect you as guide and leader. Agni, in this position of eminence, be good and gracious to us. Destroyer of negativities, subduer of the proud and insidious, you are awake, alert and watchful in your own home. Pray keep us awake, alert and watchful without relent. 
185 :Agni, bright and blazing as light and fire with your own refulgence, takeover and start well herewith this world order. Mighty intelligent ruler, rule and work in a spirit of friendship over this covenant of friends. Seated at the centre of an assembly of equals, rulers all, shine and rule, honoured and invoked as first among friends. 
186 :D i spel I i ng the distrustful, repel I i ng the false and wicked, eliminating ignorance and stupidity, fighting out all jealousy and enmity, subdue and get over all evils and undesirables of the world and give us a commonwealth of brave good heroes, overflowing with plenty, prosperity and generosity. 
187 :Enemy of sin and disease, born of divine will w i th di vine qual iti es, V i rut, durva or sahasra-kanda herb, is an antidote to disease both physical and mental, and, just as waters wash off the dirt, so does it wash off all diseases and disturbances of mind from me. 
188 :(Virut has been explained as a herb which is a physical as well as a mental sanative. While it relieves and cures physical ailments, it also relieves the mind from anxiety and depression and induces peace and tranquillity of mind and spirit. It is used as ointment, orally taken as juice and also used for massage with oil or ghrta. It has also been interpreted as human piety and divinegrace, mental and spiritual disciplinewhich, too, blesses a person with freedom from disease and disorders of the mind. This psychic version of Virut works through yama and niyama, pranayama and dhyana.) anger, curse of execrations directed to us by rivals, enemies or our friends and relatives, usual or exceptional, or whatever the adjurations even from knowledgeable persons out of anger or frustration, let all that be under our feet, let us be above all that. 
189 :The seed of the Virut sprouts a thousand ways from heaven downward. The root of the herb grows a thousand ways from earth upward. By that herb of a thousand divine branches, O lord, protect and promote us wholly, completely and all round. 
190 :Protect and promote me. Protect and promote my people. Protect and promote whatever is our real wealth, honour and excellence. Let no meanness, stinginess or adversity subdue us. Let no rivals or enemies subdue us. 
191 :Let all words and vibrations of hate and anger, curse or execrations go back, unacknowledged, to the sender, leaving us, unaffected, with ourselves and our friends of goodness and peace at heart. Thus do we break down, by nature's law itself, the back bone of the person of a negative heart and evil eye (without any response, by breaking, not by continuing, the vicious circle). 
192 :Note: Satavalekar has written a very valuable note at the end of his translation of this sukta on the herbal and psychic treatment of the ailment usually described as curse and as the evil eye. Refer to his Atharva-Veda, volume one, published by Swadhyaya Mandal, Pardi, Balsara Dist., Maharashtra, India, in 1985. 
193 :Grown are two highly efficacious Vaishnavi herbs. Arisen are two stars in the sting of the zodiac Scorpio. May they slacken and remove the highest and lowest shackles of hereditary consumption and release the patient. 
194 :Let the night pass away. Let the malignant hereditary consumptive, wasting away disease pass off from the family. Let the herb which eliminates hereditary disease remove the trace of malignancy from thefamily line and prevent its recurrence. 
195 :Let the genetic consumption destroyer vaishnavi with flower cluster of sesame and stalk of white or brown arjuna remove the trace of your hereditary disease from thefamily. 
196 :We value the plough, we value the pole and the yoke with which the garden field of herbs is ploughed and cultivated. Let the genetic disease destroyer herb eliminate the disease from the family. 
197 :Let there be proper food, care and treatment for the patients whose eyes are droopi ng. Let there be proper appreciation of those who participate in the communication of knowledge and conduct of treatment. Let there be proper care and recognition with respect for master of the field. Let the herb, destroyer of the disease, uproot the genetic disease from the family. 
198 :O physician, with dashavrksha herbal medicament, release this patient whom demonic rheumatic seizure has caught up in every joint of the body. O perfect best of the herbs and trees of the forest, bring him back to the world of healthy living people. 
199 :('Dashavrksha', is a term like another well known term 'dashamula', ten roots. Sayana in his commentary describes Dashavrksha as ten trees such as 'palasha' and 'udumbara' from a combination of which a medicine was prepared for the treatment of rheumatism. Satavalekara, from the word 'muncha' in the mantra thinks that the 'mocha' tree, also called 'munchaka' or 'sohinchana' is also very efficacious in the treatment of rheumatism, and this he says on the basis of his own experience.) The patient (earlier seized with rheumatism in every joint) has got up, has come and is here with the crowd of healthy people. He is now up and active with his child as a father normally is, and among the people he is the most actively fortunate. 
200 :He has mastered what he wanted to study and attain. He has obtained what humans normally desire. H e has gone round the cities, hundreds are the physicians he knows, hundreds the remedies, herbs and medicines. 
201 :Brilliant physicians, scholars of Veda, holy powers of nature and noble people of experience and observation have known, collected and consolidated the knowledgeforyou, O man, on this subject, and the herbs and trees have provided the medical materials on earth for you. (Be grateful and cooperative with nature and humanity, and to divinity.) One who pursues the subject practically and persistently, researches, observes, analyses and comes to correct conclusions, he alone becomes a physician of the best order. He alone, pure at heart, unpolluted in the soul, would bring the best treatment with correct medications for humanity. 
202 :O patient, I treat you with medicine and counsel and release you from bodily ailment, hereditary disease, adversity, hate, jealousy, enmity and familial feud, and I release you from the chains of Varuna, pollution of blood and air and from the sufferance of natural consequences following upon physical and psychic weaknesses, and thus I render you free and sinless by Vedic knowledge of physical and mental health and well being. May both heaven and earth now be good and auspicious to you. 
203 :May Agni with waters be healthful and peaceable to you. May nature's soma energy with herbs and forests be good and auspicious to you. Thus do I, with treatment, counsel and prayer, release you from systemic and hereditary disease, adversity, hate, jealousy, enmity and familial feud and free you from the chains of Varuna, nature's law of trespass and punishment. I render you free from disease and sin by Veda and pray may both heaven and earth be good and kind to you. 
204 :health and long age of peace and well being for you. May the four quarters of space be kind and auspicious to you. Thus do I, with treatment, counsel and prayer free you from systemic and hereditary disease, adversity, hate and malignity of equals' rivalry and release you fromthechainsofVaruna. I render you free from disease and sin by Veda and pray may both heaven and earth be good and kind to you. 
205 :May all these four divine sub-quarters of space sustained by cosmic energy be good and auspicious to you. May the all-watching, all-illuminant sun look at you with favour. Thus do I, with treatment, counsel and prayer free you from systemic hereditary disease, adversity, hate and malignity of equals' rivalry and release you from the chains of Varuna. I render you blameless and free from disease by Veda and pray may both heaven and earth be good and kind to you. 
206 :Thus do I prepare a place for you in the quarters and sub-quarters of space under the sun with good health till full ageand self-fulf i 11 ment. Thus do I freeyoufrom disease, adversity, hate, jealousy and malignity of equals' rivalry and release you from the chains of Varuna. I render you blameless and declare you free from sin and disease by Veda, and I pray may both heaven and earth be good and kind to you. 
207 :Be free from cancer and consumpti on, from evi I, calumny, hate and jealousy, and be free from seizure and snares of all systemic ailments whether they are by weakness, infection or heredity. Thus do I, with treatment, counsel and prayer, free you from disease, adversity, hate and j eal ousy of equal s' rival ry and rel ease you from the chains of Varuna. I render you blameless and free from sin and disease by Veda and pray may By treatment, counsel and prayer, you are free from disease and adversity. You have gained health of body, peace of mind and security for a full long age of good health and peace. You are thus established in the weal and well being of this beautiful world of gracious God. With this benediction and prayer I free you from disease, adversity, hate and jealousy of equals' rivalry and release you blameless and free from sin and disease by Veda and pray may both heaven and earth be good and kind to you. 
208 :Thus do brilliant physicians, free from sin and selfishness with the efficacies of nature, release you from seizure and darkness and rejuvenate you, bringing you back to light of the sun and holiness of the laws of divinity. Thus do I, with treatment, counsel and Vedic prayer, free you from personal and hereditary disease, adversity, hate, jealousy and enmity of equals and rivals and release you from the fear of Varuna's laws of justice and punishment. I render and declare you blameless and free from sin and disease by Veda and pray may both heaven and earth be good and kind to you. 
209 :You are the subduer of the evil acts of sorcery. You are the destroyer of the destroyer. You are thunder against the bolt. Struggle for and win the highest supreme. Overtake and go ahead of the ordinary. 
210 :You are dynamic. You are constantly moving. You are the winner over the evil doer. Struggle for and win the highest. Overtake and go ahead of equals. 
211 :Counter that which is hostile to us and that we hate to entertai n. A chi eve the hi ghest excel I ence, surpass the ordinary for the extra ordinary. 
212 :You are the scholar, exceptionally learned, blazing brilliant you are. You are the protector and sustainer of our existential identity. Achieve the vision of the highest. Rise far above the mundane. 
213 :You are the pure, immaculate, unsullied. You are the blaze of fire, you are the bliss of heaven, you are the light of life. Rise to and win the highest Good. Transcend the ordinary, the mundane, the transitory. (You are the man, you are the soul, closest to the Supreme.) Let heaven and earth, expansive space, M other Nature, divine sustainer of the universe and the human body, the wondrous sublime supreme soul, the vast firmament, sojourn of air and electric energy, may all these here i n me strengthen and season me i n the process of self-discipline. 
214 :O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and holy sages and scholars of humanity, adorable all, pray listen and stay by me. Bharadvaja too, lord sustainer of the universe with food and energy, articulates the sacred love of the Veda for me. I pray may our mind, which, bound in the evil snares of distractions, disturbs this self-discipline of yoga, be cooperative and join me in the process of meditation and divine realisation. 
215 :Listen Indra, lord omnipotent protector of the world of soma joy, to this determined resolve of mine which I send up to you with a heart on fire: Whatever disturbs this mind of ours in meditation I cut off from awareness like a tree from the root with the axe. 
216 :May the acts of piety, charity and yajnic service to nature and humanity done by eighty and three singers of Sama, Aditya and Vasu order of sages and brahmacharis and vibrant scholars protect and promote us. With divine love and passion of enthusiasm, I take on to that holy performance of our parents, seniors and forefathers and maintain the tradition. 
217 :O heaven and earth, shine for me to enlighten me. O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and leading lights of humanity, work on to inspire me. O A ngirasas, vibrant scholars, parents and seniors, protectors and promoters of youth, creative spirits of life, let the evil doer meet the evil consequences of his sinful deeds. 
218 :O M aruts, vibrant winds and dynamic leaders of humanity, whoever, too proud, despises us or whoever despises our Vedic learning or holy works in progress, let his crooked works and ways and words be his own self-torment. The lord of refulgentomnisciencesubjects the negationst of divinity and divine knowledge to the crucibles of self-punishment. 
219 :Your seven pranas and eight energy centres, I snap from worldly snares and open up with the word and vision of divinity. With this freedom from bondage, go to the house of Yama, the lord of ultimate dispensation, with light and fire as your medium and enlightenment as your grace of perfection. 
220 :I set your station in the refulgent light and fire of ardent enlightenment with divinity. Let fire enter and envelop your body. Let your speech go to cosmic energy. 
221 :Agni, light of life, giver of life and enlightenment, protector of life and health till full age of hundred years, overall cover of human life, inspiring as rising flames of ghrta from the vedi, strong and shining constantly by life-giving vitality of cow's ghrta, sweet, pleasing and brilliant, pray protect this child, this graduate, as father protects his children in every way possible. 
222 :Pray vest this our holy child, this brahmachari with ceremonial robes all round. Pray invest him with splendour and dignity. Bless him with strength and good health for a long age of self-fulfilment, full ripeness of mind and soul before he calls it a day. Brhaspati, master giver of knowledge, has given the vestments of knowledge for this brilliant Soma, fresh inspired graduate, to wear and justify in his life and conduct throughout life. 
223 :Shining Soma, put on the ceremonial robe, wrap yourself round with knowledge and brilliance of success and well being in life. Be a protector of people and the cows and other animals against violence and calumny. Live a full life of hundred years and more. Work and create a life of abundant health and wealth all round. 
224 :Come, stand on the rock and stay firm. Letyour body, mind and soul be strong as the rock. May alI divine forces of nature and all brilliancies of humanity join to give you a life of hundred years of adamantine strength. 
225 :While we bring for you the first vestments to wear, may all the Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity, protect and promote you. Nobly born you are, fortunate, rising and advancing, may many brothers follow in your foot steps. 
226 :The vagabond, the bully, the obstinate, the incorrigible, the ogre, entire demonic progeny of wrath, violence and terror, all these we face and make them disappear from society. 
227 :From our stalls, assemblies and intellectual gatherings, from the code of our basic values of culture and manners, our mind and soul, and from our centres and spaces of economy, and from our home, we banish all ill begotten thoughts, feelings and attitudes like children of the devil. 
228 :That slough of mean existence far below the normal minimum standard of human life, culture and behaviour according to Dharma, there let all evil and enmity, all despondency, negativity and spirits of destruction sink and stay. 
229 :And may Indra, master ruler and protector of living beings, expel all evil forces and destructive tendencies, and even if they happen to be deep rooted even at the bottom of our home land and tradition, let I ndra rule and eradicate them by the thunderbolt of his law and power. 
230 :O negativity if you happen to be organic or hereditary, or caused by another person, say by company or contagion or infection or even peer pressure, or if you happen to be caused by people of evil and destructive nature, even so, O evil and destructive diseases and tendencies, demonic forces of meanness and negation, get off all from here. 
231 :Just as a race horse reaches and wins its goal, so having reached the central cause of conflict and the sources of evil and demonic forces and tendencies in humanity, O evil forces, I have won all your conflicts and battles against us. Now get off and disappear for ever from here. 
232 :Just as heaven and earth never fear, nor are they ever hurt, nor destroyed, similarly, O my mind and pranic identity, never fear. 
233 :Just as day and night never fear, never hurt are they, never destroyed, so O my mind and courage, never fear. 
234 :Just as sun and moon never fear, nor are they hurt or destroyed, same way, O my courage and pranic energy, never fear. 
235 :Just as Brahmana, man of truth and divinefaith, and Kshatriya, man of power and integrity, never fear, nor are they hurt or destroyed, same way, O my spirit and courage of prana, never fear. 
236 :Yathd satyaih canrtam ca na bibhito na risyatah. Eva me prana mb bibheh. 
237 :j ust as commitment to Truth and challenge to Untruth never fear, nor are the two ever hurt or destroyed, same way, O my spirit of truth and courage of pranic challenge, never fear. 
238 :Just as whatever has been in the past and whatever might be in the future never fear, nor can the past be undone nor the future stalled, nor can they be hurt or destroyed, same way, O my spirit and pranic courage, never fear. Go on, let the past recede into history, let the future come as a great opportunity. N o regret, no fear. 
239 :May the vital energies of prana and apana protect and promote me with life and resistance against death. This is the voice of the soul. 
240 :May the heaven and earth protect and inspire me w i th the voice of revel ati on at the cl osest i n the heart. This is the voice of conscience in prayer. 
241 :May the sun protect and advance me with the eye for vision of divinity around. This is the voice of earnest desire. 
242 :May Agni, self-refulgent light and light giver of the universe, protect and promote me with all brilliancies of the divine world. This is the voice of conscientious will for illumination. 
243 :May Vishvambhara, lord protector and sustainer of the universe, protect and promote me and invest me with universal life energy at the optimum. This is the voice of Ashish, elan vital, the will to live at the full in truth of word and deed. 
244 :You are the life and lustre of existence. Give me the lustre of life. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
245 :You are courage, patience and fortitude in the spirit of invincible challenge. Giveme courage, patience and fortitude. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
246 :You are the strength of life. Give me strength of body, mind and soul. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
247 :You are the life itself beyond death. Give me full good health and full age. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
248 :You are universal power of the ear. G ive me the power of hearing for the divine Word. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
249 :You are the eye of the universe. Give me the vision divine. This is the voice of truth and payer. 
250 :You are the ultimate cover and protection. Give me the cover and protection of divinity for defence of the self against evil and negation. This is the voice of Agni, self blazing fire and passion of life, you wield the power to destroy jealous rivals. Give me the strength, power and passion to destroy the hostile rivals. This is the voice of truth. 
251 :You are the destroyer of adversaries. Give me the power to fight out and destroy my adversaries. This is the voice of prayer in truth. 
252 :You are the destroyer of the spirit of evil. Give me the power to destroy the forces of evil. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
253 :You are the power to destroy the ogres and demons of nature and society. Give me the power to You are the power that destroys the mean and the negatives. G ive me the power to destroy meanness, want and negativity. This is the voice of truth in faith with surrender. 
254 :Agni, the fire and blaze that's yours, let it burn up that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
255 :Agni, the passion and fire that's yours, with that seize that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
256 :Agni, the fire and flame and the light that's yours, with that either scorch or enlighten that who hates Agni, the radiance that's yours, with that burn and eliminate that which hates and harms us and that which we hate to suffer. 
257 :Agni, the fire and splendour that's yours, to that, subject him that hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
258 :Vayu, the fire and power that is yours, with that burn up that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
259 :Vayu, the power and passion that is yours, with thatseizeand remove that which hates us, andthatwhich we hate to suffer. 
260 :Vayu, the fire and flame that is yours, with that enflameand remove that which hates us, andthatwhich we hate to suffer. 
261 :Vayu, the intensity that is yours, with that cleanse that which hates us, and that which we hate to suffer. 
262 :Vayu, the power and lustre that is yours, with that cleanse that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
263 :O sun, the light and blaze that is yours, with that burn up that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
264 :O sun, the blaze and passion that is yours, with that seize that which hates us, and that which we hate to suffer. 
265 :O sun, the fire and flame that is yours, with that scorch up that which hates us, and that we hate to suffer. 
266 :O sun, the splendour and glory that is yours, with that cleanse off that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
267 :O moon, the heat that is yours, with that cleanse off that which hates us and that we hate to suffer. 
268 :O moon, the passion that is yours, with that cleanse that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
269 :O moon, the light ray that is yours, with that cleanse that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
270 :O moon, the light beam that is yours, with that cleanse that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
271 :O moon, the splendour that is yours, with that cleanse that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
272 :O waters, the heat that is in you, with that wash off that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
273 :O waters, the power that is in you, with that wash off that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
274 :O waters, the brilliance that is in you, with that wash off that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
275 :O waters, the radiance that is in you, with that wash off that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
276 :O waters, the splendour that is in you, with that wash off that which hates us and that which we hate to suffer. 
277 :prayer for natural purity of spirit, energy for action and balance of mind in our process of living. 
278 :The human body is an abodeof divinities. Agni abides in the vital heat, the tongue and speech. Vayu abides in pranic energy and the tactual faculty. The sun abides in the eye. The moon abides in the mind. And the waters abide in the male virility and fertility of the female in addition to the fluidity of blood. This knowledge is enshrined in the Aitareya Upanishad. H ence the prayer to Agni is a prayer for vitality against frigidity and anger. The prayer to Vayu is for energy against debility and sloth. The prayer to the sun is for light against darkness and ignorance. The prayer to the moon is for peace against agitation and hypertension. And the prayer to the waters is for fluidity in the dynamics of life. On the wholethe prayer isfor positive values of health, mental and spiritual alertness in a state of balance. Both want and excess are negativities in oneway or another. Balance gives us the optimum state of performance. 'Dvesha' means hate. Negativities in these hymns are personified as enemies which we hate, whether they are in others or in ourselves. At the same time negativities hate us because they act as our enemies. Hence the prayer: With your positive powers, destroy those negativities which hate us and which we too hate because, whether they are in others or in ourselves, we hate to suffer them as enemies of I if e. H ence the prayer for cleansing of the personality. 
279 :To hate negativity does not mean that we hate the person who suffers from negativity. We love the person as person, hence the prayer for elimination of the negativity and cleansing of the person. 
280 :O demonic killer, destroyer, thieves and robbers, let you and your followers go back to yourselves. Let your arms and onslaughts return on you. Consume and destroy whoever you work for. Consume and destroy whoever sends you down to prowl. Consume and destroy your own selves. 
281 :O thievish violence, O crooked friends of violence, let you all and your allies go back to yourselves, to where you come from. Let your arms and onslaughts rebound on you. Consume and destroy whoever you work for. Consume and destroy whoever appoi nts you to destroy. C onsume and destroy your own selves. 
282 :O thieves and allied forces of white collar felons, let you all and your followers go back to yourselves, to whereveryou comefrom. Let your arms and yourtactics roll back on you. Consume and destroy whoever you work for. Rob and consume whoever appoints you to rob. Consume and destroy your own selves. 
283 :O snake, O crooked movers in glittering garb, let you and your allied forces go back to yourselves. Let your arms and your biting onslaughts return on you. Consume and destroy whoever you work for. Bite and destroy whoever appoints you. Consume and destroy your own selves. 
284 :O saboteurs and your allied forces, go back to your own den. O thieves of national resources, let your arms and onslaughts return on you. Consume and destroy whoever you work for. Consume and destroy whoever sends you down to destroy. Consume and destroy your own selves. 
285 :O venomous destroyers and vociferous mercenaries, misguided fools, go back to your own den and look within. Let your tactics, attacks and protests be directed on yourselves. Catch and destroy whoever is your master. Destroy your own weapons and attacks. Destroy whoever sends you down. Eat up and destroy your own selves. 
286 :O deceptive forces of nature and society, destroyers of honesty and positive values, go back, you and your allies. Let your arms and onslaughts turn on to you. Destroy him who is your master. Destroy him that has sent you. Eat up and destroy your own selves. 
287 :O burning life destroying forces of life and nature, thievish killers, go back, you all and your allies. Let your arms and attacks go back to you. Destroy the master you work for. Destroy the force that directs you hither. Eat up your own flesh and destroy yourselves out of existence. 
288 :(This hymn suggests that whatever the negative forces that attack life and society should be so tactically dealt with that they turn their forces, intentions, arms and ammunition upon themselves and die out. For example take cancer. Treat it so that cancer cel I s, i n stead of eating other cells, eat themselves and be selfdestructive.) Let Prshniparni, divine herb of bright rainbow leaves, be auspicious for us. Let it act agaist and root out consumptive and cancerous diseases of body and mind. Strong it is, mighty powerful devourer of sin and negativity. I have studied and researched it and I value it as a divine sanative worthy of adoration. 
289 :Prshniparni is a great challenge to deadly diseases. It is the foremost curative in the field of killer diseases. With it I cure the first and last of notorious diseases like breaking the neck of a demon. 
290 :O Prshniparni, challenge, cure and root out that life threatening disease which robs life of its beauty, vitality and longevity, which sucks up the blood and which kills the foetus in the womb. 
291 :O divine Prshniparni, bury these life consuming, life destroying diseases in the depths of mountains, burning them all here as fire burns dirt to ash. 
292 :Trdp5r -ofcr cb u cj iWl Pci h 4i <Jh i h i dUljTi JlT^iPd d^cilldl 1 ^ II Throw out these lifethreatning, life consuming diseases, drive them out for all time. W here darkest of the darknesses proceed and abide, there have I driven the blood thirsty flesh eating diseases all, like Let the animals come back to the stalls, all those that had gone out over the forest meadows. The air, the breeze, the winds refresh them as friends. Tvashta, the development expert, knows their breeds and qualities. Let Savita, the inspirer, keeper, keep them properly in the stalls for good health. 
293 :Let the animals come back to the stalls together. Let Brhaspati, the head keeper, who knows all of them, bring them back. Let Sinivali, the food manager, lead the foremost homeward, and Anumati, the controller, keep them together in order. 
294 :Let the ani mals be and move together, together with horses, and letthementoo who manage be tog ether. Let the harvest of grain and grass be profusely rich. I do the development yajna with highly promotive materials. 
295 :By yajna with cow's ghrta, I bring a flood of cow's milk. I bring strength and taste for living. Our youth are strong, fully satisfied and totally happy. May the cows and all animals be strong and steadfast with me as their master protector. 
296 :I am blest: I have plenty of cow's milk. I have plenty of food and joy of life. Our youth are happy, satisfied and self-fulfilled. Our women are happy and satisfied in the home with the family. 
297 :Hey Oshadhi, spirit of life, no enemy can win away my food of life, none can win over my understanding of life's values, its questions and answers. All time challenger, all time subduer of doubts and irrelevancies, answer and silence all questions raised by negationists one by one. Render them all empty and meaningless. 
298 :(The mantra may also be interpreted as a cure for depression and self-distrust.) You are the gift of suparna the Garuda, eagle power of refulgence and high imagination. You are the achievement of Sukara, holiest action of the immaculate soul, with high pranic energy. Answer all doubts and questi ons raised by scepti cs and negati oni sts and si I ence them one by one. Expose them all as empty and meaningless. 
299 :Indra, the soul, in defence against the onslaughts of negative desires and passions, bears and wears you on the arm. Answer all doubts and questions raised by sceptics and negationists and silence them one by one. Expose them all as empty and meaningless. 
300 :Indra, mighty ruler and warrior, in self-defence agaist demonic forces, ill health and disease takes the Pata herb. O herb, answer alI doubts and questions raised by sceptics and negationists and silence them all one by one. Expose them as empty and meaningless. 
301 :With that power I fight and drive out all enemies as Indra, leader of the human community, throws out all wolfish enemies from the settlement. O power of life and health, answer all doubts, dangers and questions raised by sceptics and negationists and silence them one by one. Expose them all and render them empty and meaningless. 
302 :O Rudra, physician of powerful soothing herb and water treatment, giver of peace and prosperity with good health to the home and family, noble and conscientious at work, O herb, answer all doubts and questi ons raised by scepti cs and negati oni sts and si I ence them one by one. Expose them, O herb, and reduce the ailments to naught. 
303 :Indra, eliminate the questions and onslaughts of the demonic forces who wantto subdue us and reduce us to slavery. Speak to us and inspire uswith will, power and force. In the struggle and debate between negativities and our positive powers of health, intelligence and progress, make me the superior and victorious power. 
304 :O Life of good health and well being, may this child grow on to full age and self-fulfilment unto you. Let no other cause of ailment and death, though hundreds they are, assail him. j ust as the mother holds the baby safe in her arms, so may M itra, universal love, protect him against sin and disease, may the warmth of the sun save him as a friendly soul. 
305 :LetM itra andVaruna, prana and apana energies, days and nights, light and warmth of the sun and cool of the oceans, all loving and operative together in unison, destroyers of negativities and untimely mortalities, lead him on to grow healthy upto full age and fulfilment till death. And may Agni, living warmth of nature, and Agni, enlightened teacher and high priest of educational yajna, knowing all processes of the growth and maturity of body and mind, inform and enlighten him about the rise, growth and maturity of all senses, mind and intellect as he proceeds in years, (nature by natural process and teacher by teaching and training). 
306 :O lord of life and death, you govern the exits and entrances of living beings of the earth, those that are already born and those that shall be born. Let prana not forsake this child. Let not apana forsake him. Let no friends hurt him. Let no enemies kill him. (O lord, grant him full life of good health and total fulfilment.) Let heaven, the father, and earth, the mother, both operative in unison, protect you through full age to fulfil ment ti 11 death so that, sustained by the energi es of prana and apana, you live a life of full hundred years in the lap of mother nature. 
307 :Divine Agni, lord self-refulgent, lead him on to life's vitality and splendour through full age. O refulgent sun and oceans, O prana and apana energies, bring him the cherished vitality and virility of glowing health. O M other Nature, like the mother as you are, bless him with peace and joy so that, O divinities of the world of nature and humanity, he may livea long lifetill full age May the brilliant nobilities of the world, Brha- spati, Lord Almighty, sagely scholar of the Vedic lore, Agni, lord self-refulgent, and the sun, grant this man the lustre of a long life and establish him in the strength of body and in the essence and joy of earthly glory. 
308 :O Jataveda, omnipresent fire and vital energy of life, grant this man a long life. O Tvashta, divine maker of body forms, bring handsome and noble children for him. O Savita, lord creator of earthly life and light, bring him good health and brilliance of wealth and glory so that this dedicated child of yours may live a full hundred years. 
309 :O heaven, O earth, O father and mother, both of equal mind in unison, may your blessings shower on us. Bear and bring this man strength and energy, noble progeny, efficiency and expertise for success, wealth and excellence. O lord omnipotent, Indra, may he, winning fields of life's battles, creating new fields of possibility and progress, subduing negativities and fighting adversaries, live a full hundred years of life and fulfilment as your dedicated child. 
310 :Given as a gift by Indra, lord omnipotent, taught and trained by Varuna, judicious parents and eminent teachers, inspired and sent by M aruts, stormy powers of nature and humanity, this young man has now come to us, a mature and perfect citizen. O heaven and earth, pray take this young man under your loving care. Let him never feel short of food and drink for his body, mind and soul. 
311 :O powers, abundant in food and energy, bring this young man food and energy. O powers abundant in milk and water, bring him milk and water. May heaven and earth bring him food, energy and enlightenment. May all divinities of nature and humanity, the M aruts, tempestuous forces of the wind, and A pah, rolling powers of earthly and spatial oceans bring him energy and enthusiasm. 
312 :I gratify and fulfill your heart and soul with auspicious thoughts, ambitions and will. Healthy, happy and brilliant, enjoy life to the full. Both of you (bride and bride-groom) having taken the human form of Ashvins, complementary personalities joined in one, blest with perfect will and potential for mutual action, living together in the home, act and enjoy life to the full, drink the soma distilled to perfect taste and purity. 
313 :majardm sd ta esd. Taya tvam jiva saradah suvarcd md ta a susrodbhisajaste akran. 
314 :Indra, served, honoured and worshipped relentlessly, has, since time immemorial, created this unaging and inexhaustible food, energy, power and potential of life for you. By that gift, happy, strong and lustrous brilliant, live a full hundred years of life. May this light and lustre of life never diminish and wear away. The physicians of life have created and maintain this power and potential of health and life for you. 
315 :Just as the wind touches and shakes the grass on the ground, so do I move your heart, O girl, so that you may fall in love with me and never go away from me. 
316 :Ashvins, mutually loving couple, sinceyou join together in love and marriage, win each other and move on together in life, may all good fortunes of the world come to you, may your mind and soul be together, and may your vows of discipline and life's values in covenant be alike in unison. 
317 :W here the golden birds fly cooing and calling for each other, there let my love's call strike like a sting in the bud (the heart), and let them be released of the tension of affliction in freedom and fulfilment. 
318 :W hat is inside in the heart is out on the surface. W hatever is out is deep at the heart core. W hen it is so, O nature's sanative of affliction (oshadhi), grab the mind of the maidens, they are blest with universal beauty, love and expression. 
319 :I too have come with love for the maiden. And I come with all the power and lustre of the world to offer, loud proclaiming my love and hope to win and carry away the prize. 
320 :Mighty is the destructive force of Indra: rays of the sun, gusts of the wind, currents of electricity, showers of clouds, running waters and catalytic fragrances of yajna, these are destroyers of dangerous insects and germs of disease. W ith these and with the resistant force of the body, I crush the germs and insects as I crush hard grain with the grinding stone. 
321 :We crush and destroy insects and germs, those that are vi si bl e or i nvisi bl e, creeping ones as caterpi 11 ars, bugs in beds, fast running ones and those that ramble around. 
322 :I destroy the hiding pests with a strong insecticide so that whether they move or not, they become I ifeless. Those that survive and those that don't, I eliminate with the vacha herb so that ultimately none survives. 
323 :Germs and insects that abide in the intestines, in the hair on head, in and on the ribs those that creep, burrow into the skin and consume the blood and flesh, all these we destroy with vacha. 
324 :All those germs and insects which thrive on mountains, in forests, on herbs and trees, on and in the animals, inthewaters, and those which infect our bodies, all these we destroy along with their places of breeding. 
325 :Let thesun when itisrising and when it is setting kill with its rays the germs which are in the earth and in the cows. 
326 :I destroy the germs and insects of varied colour, of four eyes, creeping ones and white, all. I break their back, I break their head, and I uproot them totally. 
327 :O germs and insects, I destroy you like a devourer of evil, like an eminent scientist, like blazing f i re. I d estroy g er m s an d i n sects by th e sag el y k n o w I ed g e The ruler of these germs and insects is dead. A nd ki 11 ed i s their keeper of the fort. D estroyed are the germs whose breeder is gone. Their mother is gone, dead, their brother is dead, their sister is dead. 
328 :Killed are those of similar species and their vassals. Killed are their all round defences and resistances. And killed are all those which are too small and vile. Thus all those visible and invisible germs and insects are killed alike and together. 
329 :O deadly insect, O germ, I break your fangs, both of them, with which you strike. I break your bag of poison in which you store the death sting for the victim. 
330 :I remove and uproot the worst cancer and consumption from your eyes, nostrils, ears, chin, brain and tongue related to the head area. 
331 :I remove and uprootthe consumptive, cancerous disease related to the arms, from your neck arteries and veins, nape, collar and chest bones, spine, shoulders and arms. 
332 :I remove and uprootthe consumptive, cancerous disease from your heart, lungs, gall bladder, sides, I remove and uprootthe consumptive, cancerous disease from your intestines, anal area, colon, stomach, flanks, lower abdomen and navel area. 
333 :I remove and uprootthe consumptive, cancerous disease from your thighs, knees, heels, fore-feet and toes, hips, lower back and genitalia. 
334 :I remove and uprootthe consumptive, cancerous disease from your bones, marrow, tendons, vei ns, hands, fingers and nails. 
335 :The consumptive cancerous disease which has spread all over your skin and body in every part, every pore and hair, and every joint, we remove and uproot with the diagnosis and judicious treatment by the Kashyapa, enlightened physician. 
336 :Pashupati, lord ruler and protector of living beings, humans, birds and animals, may, we pray, be kind and gracious to accept our homage offered by yajna and bless the yajamana with health, growth, progress and prosperity. 
337 :O Devas, divinities and nobilities of nature and humanity, while you are releasing the seed vitality for life in the world of existence, pray bless the yajamana with the path of rectitude, and when he is established in the path of divinity then whatever is the dearest soma love of the devas may also come to the portion of the consecrated prayerful devotee. 
338 :Those who, with concentrated mind and inner vision in meditation, seethe soul bound in sufferance, mayAgni, lord self-refulgent, enlighten, and may he, Vishvakarma, happy with the children of his creation, liberate them at the earliest. 
339 :Those who are deep in the business of life and yet retain their vision of divinity, all round versatile in varied roles and situations of life many ways and yet same in the essence and similar in character in divine service, these may Vayu, lord self-potent and self- refulgent, Prajapati, sustainer of life happy with the children of his creation, liberate at the earliest. 
340 :Eminent men of the first order of knowledge and vision should gratefully receive and recognise the flow of prana, life energy vibrating in the personality for the sustenance of every part and faculty dedicated to divine service. O man, be steadfast rooted in divinity, rise to the paradise of being by paths of divinities and ultimately rise to the state of divine light and eternal bliss. 
341 :May Vishvakarma, divine maker of the world, changeforoursakethelow, parsimonious and negative impulse and character of those who, though they enjoy life comfortably for themselves, do not contribute to the wealth of life, for which meanness and selfishness, I i beral, devout and i ntel I i gent people dedi cated to yaj ni c creation feel sorry and concerned for them. May the lord change their nature and character positively in the liberal direction. 
342 :Sages say that a person dedicated to yajna and concerned and distressed for people and progeny is not involved with sin (but he might miss certain cherished things of life, nevertheless). We pray may Vishvakarma join and bless us with those little sweets of life which the yajnapati had to miss. 
343 :One who believes that the performers of soma yajna are not worthy of yaj ni c gift or that they are mi sers neither knows what yajna is, nor does he attain to it, nor is he patient and undisturbed at the time of a crisis in life. Self-suffering in bondage, this man is a sinner. Hey Vishvakarma, redeem this man of what he has committed, for the sake of his well being and salvation. 
344 :Blazing brilliant are the Rshis, highly venerable. Sal utati ons to them. Truly, their vi si on i s truth, and truth abides in the depths of their mind and soul. Salutations to Almighty Brhaspati, loud and bold and sincere. Salutations to you, Vishvakarman, pray save us, protect us, advance us in life. 
345 :Vishvakarma is the light of yajna, the whole creation. He is the sustainer, his is the revelation of the Word of it. I honour, adore and worship Vishvakarma and offer homage by yajna with thought, speech and participative holy chant I listen. Indeed this yajna of the universe is kindled, sustained and expanded by Vishvakarma. May all Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, all happy at heart, come and join this yajna of homage. 
346 :noble of thought and speech, come to us with all good fortune and excellence to wed this noble minded maiden of cheerful disposition. She is lovable among the eminent and agreeable among equals in company. May she enjoy brilliance, happiness and prosperity in the company of her husband. 
347 :By the solemn sanctity of the truth of the law of self-refulgent lord and sustainer of life, society and the home and family, I (husband/wife) offer, enter and confirm the Bhaga, happy matrimonial sacramental covenant, loved and accepted by Soma (husband, wife) approved by Brahma (Lord Almighty, Veda, and the Brahmana priest), and finalised, sealed and protected by the congregation in the presence of the sacred Agni, fire of yajna. 
348 :O lord, self-refulgent, Agni, O sacred fire of yajna, let this wedded woman now join her husband. LetSoma, noble brilliant husband, join her ashisnoble blessed wife. And let the wife, having joined her husband, be the proud mother of their children and shine and rule the home as the queen of prosperity and conjugal bliss. 
349 :Indra, lord of prosperity, just as a dwelling is the favourite haunt of deer together, so may this woman, dear in communion with her husband, happy and prosperous, be ever the favourite of her husband in the home. 
350 :O bride, ascend the ark of matrimonial glory, full, perfect and unfailing, and thereby take your husband across the seas, in covenanted love. 
351 :O mistress of good fortune, call on and keep the husband with you. Keep him happy at heart with you. Keep him wholly on the right side of you, him who is in mutual love with you, worthy of your love. 
352 :This is the gold. This is the auspicious bdellium. This is the sacred water to sprinkle on the path. This is the token of good luck and prosperity. These are given for the groom's party to win their love and good will for you. 
353 :May Savita, lord creator, guide you. May the husband, loving and worthy of love guide you. O lord, destroyer of suffering as a sanative, keep the wife and husband together for both of you. 
354 :LetAgni, the commander blazing inarms, march upon our enemies, well knowing, burning off the evil curse. Let him, knowing all his forces and all those he faces, stun the forces of the hostiles, disarming them to nullity. 
355 :O M aruts, stormy troops of commandos in thunderous array, keep steadfast thus in top form. Advance, strike and overthrow. Indefatigable warriors, victorious, they are bright and blazing, andAgni istheir leader and commander, ever vigilant about the latest that happens and ever ready to march upon the assailant. 
356 :Indra, leader and commander of power and glory, destroyer of evil and darkness, and Agni, refulgent leading scholar and teacher, whatever the force poised against us as enemy, both of you, pray, destroy that enmity, distress and darkness. 
357 :I ndra, ruler and commander of power and glory, Iet your thunderbolt of j ustice and punishment powered by judgment and passion for rectitude fall upon the enemies of humanity, breaking down all elements of negativity and destruction. Let it eliminate these elements up front, behind and far away, and turn the distracted minds of adversaries to follow truth and the rule of law. 
358 :I ndra, O commander of the power and force of the nation, bewilder, hypnotise or fascinate the forces of the enemies. Scattered and distracted as they are, throw them off by the stormy force of fire and wind and let them disappear. 
359 :Letlndra, with his force and power, stupefy the enemy power and force. Let the stormy troops destroy the enemies with their power and lustre. Let light and fire, Agni, dazzle the enemy eyes to bewilderment, and let the enemy retreat, defeated even before the actual fight. 
360 :Let Agni, our brilliant leader and commander, versatile strategist and tactician, march against the enemy destroying the evil curse and misfortune of malignity and adversity. Let him, knowing all his own powers and potential and also the enemy's, bewilder the mind and morale of the hostileforces and force them to lay down their arms. 
361 :O commander, leaders and fighters of the hostile forces, this Agni, our commander would bewilder and frustrate whatever thoughts, plans and strategies you have at heart. He would strike you at the heart of your strongholds of your position and throw you out of the entire area. 
362 :Indra, ruler and commander, bewildering the enemy's plans, mind and morale, move forward in advance of their strategy. Scatter them with the force of fire and wind, force them to flee, and root them out totally. 
363 :Let their plans and strategies be uprooted from here. Let their mind and morale be stupefied and gone astray, and then whatever else now is at their heart, frustrate all that too. 
364 :O fear and confusion, paralysing powers stupefying the mind and seizing the limbs, go forward, far and deep, let their hearts burn with grief and remorse, catch and cover the enemies in deep darkness, pierce the enemy heart with pain. 
365 :O M aruts, brave warriors, that army of the alien forces which comes upon us advancing with equal pride, valour and vaulting enthusiasm, penetrate, disarray and cover with frustrative darkness and confusion so that no one may know and distinguish between one and another, friend or foe. 
366 :O high priest of the nation, Agni, let the noble man of holy and independent action be here in the ruling seat, let his voice of rule and order be ringing over earth and reverberate over the vast skies. O ruler, let the M aruts, vibrant citizens and leading lights of nation join you, and with them, with power and self sacrifice, carry on the national yajna which is worthy of total dedication. 
367 :Even if heisfaraway, brilliantpeopleand rising youth should support, move and inspire I ndra, the ruler, wise, far sighted and dynamic, for the sake of friendship and cooperation specially when noble sages and corporate power offer Gayatri and Brhati verses of the Veda as homageto exalt his holiness and power through Sautramani yajna in his honour. 
368 :Let Varuna, chief of waters, call on you for the development of water programmes. Let Soma, chief of herbs, vegetation and forests call on you for the development of mountains and rain and river projects. Let Indra, chief of social planning and welfare, call on you for the welfare of the people. And for all these, you be the supreme among them liketheeaglein birds, come to them and attend to the people. 
369 :Let Shyena, information and communication department, bring you information important for political and administrative purposes about what is happening in other and far off regions, information that has been suppressed and blocked by nefarious forces. LetAshvins, special network of complementary powers of information render the channels of information simple and clear. O citizens of settled and undisturbed cooperation, be together in loyalty with the ruler and the ruling order and live in peace all round. 
370 :Let the people opposed to you and their fri ends and corporates, who might have otherwise lost their chance, call on you, meet you and show generosity of mind to cooperate with you. Let Indra, defence and administration, Agni, teachers and researchers, and all the nobilities of humanity and powers of nature in the environment, bear and bring about peace and progress W hoever be your equal and close and whoever lower and alienated that opposes your cal I or the nation's call on you to the ruling seat of authority, keep him out and notify, and later if he recants and cooperates, call him in here and let him understand for his own good. 
371 :O refulgent ruler, this Rashtra, this social order has come under your rule and care. A scend your seat of power with your regal lustre. Shine and rule as the sole ruler and protector of the people, first and foremost citizen of the land. Let the people in all quarters of the republic invoke and honour you as the ruler. Be the highest venerable and approachable man worthy of homage and salutation here. 
372 :Let the people select, accept and consecrate you to rule over the land, peoplein all fivedivinedirections. Grace the highest seat and office of the republic and from there, shining in glory, share the wealth, power and honour of the land with us. 
373 :Let people of equal merit and status in attendance and assistance call upon you and meet you well and openly with reverence and homage in a state of transparency. LetAgni, the head of information and communication go round and bewith you withoutdelay and without any gap. Let women and children in the dominion be happy at heart. And, brilliant, unrelenting and unsparing, be careful that there is excess of income over expenditure in the budget by taxes, surplus, no deficit. 
374 :LettheA shvins, complementary forces of nature and humanity such as sun and moon, positive and negative currents of electric energy, teacher and preacher, scientist and technologist, M itra and Varuna, prana and apana, love and judgment, Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity, M aruts, currents of winds and leading lights of humanity, all these invoke, inspire and guide you in advance of decision and execution of action. In the light of their messages, make up your mind in matters of the distribution of wealth, and then, brilliant, relentless and self-confident without compromise, allocate the funds for us among various departments for development and settlement of problems. 
375 :Come fast from the farthest corner where there be a crisis. Reach the farthest where there is need. May heaven and earth both be good, the environment good and benevolent for the dominion. This is what self- refulgent Varuna, lord of the universe, says to you of you. He has called upon you. The same you come. Take over this dominion, be that same and rule. 
376 :Indra, ruler of rulers, go far among the people. M eeting with the best, you would know them and their problems. It is the people who call upon you to visit their homes. So you honour the noble and brilliant and develop the community to a higher level. 
377 :The people of the land, all prosperous, all different in many ways, going by the paths of justice and rectitude have unanimously elected you to this first and highest seat of the nation. They all in unison call upon you to take over the rule and command. O ruler, brilliant, glorious and self-confident, good at heart, take over this dominion, rule, control the Decemvirate and complete a full hundred years of your life. 
378 :It is come, the Parnamani, strong and virile, which, destroys the adversaries with its strength. It is the vitality of divinities, essenceof herbs, which would, without fail, inspire me with vigour and splendour. (Parnamani, literally a jewel-crystal of leaves, has been explained as a preparation of palasha and other leaves, as the highest giver of vigour and life which is Parameshvara, and as a man of the top quality of strength, intelligence and brilliance such as the makers of a nation are.) O Parnamani, giver of vigour and illumination, vest me with strength and honour worthy of the nation, wealth and excellence worthy of the motherland so that I may rise to the distinguished position of highest eminence among the most meritorious persons of my native Rashtra (order of governance). 
379 :That precious jewel, the secret vitality which the devas, divinities, vested in the herb, may they vest in us with long age of good health and vigour so that we may carry on the business of the social order with distincition. 
380 :Thejewel leaf of soma, life giver, blest by Indra, divine omnipotence, seasoned and enlightened by Varuna, divine wisdom and judgment, has come to me with lustrous vigour which, highly loving and brilliant with enthusiasm, I cherish for a long life of hundred years. 
381 :Let this parna jewel, leaf of soma, divine life and enlightenment, be the supreme guide in my mind and spirit for protection against all untoward misfortune so that I may be superior among equals, wise colleagues and leading pioneers around me. 
382 :O Soma jewel of life divine, inspire me that all those people who are expert chariot makers, metallurgists, eminent intellectuals and distinguished sages of vision and wisdom be around close to me for state business of governance and administration. 
383 :O Soma jewel of life divine, let all those who are rulers in their department, electors and makers of rulers, media men, and village and community leaders be around close to me for state business. 
384 :O divine jewel of life, you are parna, giver of fullness and perfection, protector of the body form in good health, potent brave, original brother with me, your brave companion. O jewel, O Soma of life, by virtue of that refulgence of universal all time nature I bind you and me together in the essence. (For the similarity of essence between the human and the Divine Spirit, reference may be made to Rgveda, 1,164, 20.) Just as an ashvattha plant sprouted and grown on a khadira tree is doubly efficacious, so is a man born of strong parents after Punsavana ceremony doubly strong. May the efficacious ashvattha and the brave hero destroy my enemies, physical as well as human, which I hate to suffer and those that injure me. 
385 :(Ashvattha in this sukta may be interpreted as the herb or as the brave hero. The speaker may be interpreted as an average person, or as the ruler in continuation of the previous sukta. In support of the interpretation of Ashvattha as a settled person, reference may be made to Rgveda 6, 47, 24 and Taittiriya Brahmanam 3, 8, 12, 2; 1, 1, 3, 9; Shatapatha 12, 7, 1, 9; Aitareya 7, 32, 8, 16; Shatapatha 5, 3, 5, 14; and Taittiriya 1, 7, 8, 7.) Reference: Vaidic Kosha (Arsha Sahitya PracharaTrust: Delhi, 1975, p. 138.) by Rajvir Shastri. 
386 :Ashvattha, brave hero, efficacious remedy of evil, jointly with Indra, the sun, dispeller of darkness, and in friendly combination with M itra, the wind, and Varuna, water, uproot and destroy the disturbing, fierce and convulsive enemies. (In the human context, Indra, M itra and Varuna may mean power, love and judgment.) A shvattha, just as you penetrate into the mighty battle and cleave the enemy forces, so pray scatter all those whom I hate to suffer and those that hate me. 
387 :With you, who move freely challenging your opponents like a ferocious bull, may we, O ashvattha, challenge and defeat all our adversaries. 
388 :Ashvattha, let destruction bind these enemies of mine with unbreakable chains of death whom I hate to suffer and who hate me. 
389 :Ashvattha, just as growing and rising over other herbs and trees, you keep them down, similarly break the heads of my enemies and totally destroy them. 
390 :Let them, fallen and down, drift and drown like a boat cut off from the moorings. For those who are caught up in deadly snares, there is no return. 
391 :strength of mind, determination of will and the mantric power of the Veda and divine grace. Let us drive away all these ailments by the branch of the Ashvattha tree, the tree that is life whose seed is Brahma Itself. 
392 :On the head of the fast running stag, there is medicine. With that, that is, the horn, the physician can cure and destroy hereditary diseases of all kinds in general. 
393 :O man, the virile and generous deer is in harmony with your life and health specially when it strides on its four legs. O physician, value the horn and say: O horn, destroy that hereditary disease which is concentrated in the heart of this patient. 
394 :That deer skin which shines glossy and smooth I i ke the four sided cover of a chariot, w ith that, O patient, we drive out the chronic disease from all parts of your body. 
395 :Those two well known glorious stars shining in the sky, the sun and moon, which dispel darkness, may similarly release the patient from the snares of the chronic disease whether it is of the highest or of the lowest worst malignancy. 
396 :A nd waters are the basic sanatives. Waters are destroyers of ailment and malignity. Waters are the universal cure. May the waters relieve the patient of the chronic hereditary disease. 
397 :If a chronic disease has been afflicting you actively since your very birth, I know the remedy for When the stars fade out and the dawns wane away, let all chronic ailment be off and out, let all hereditary disease fade away. 
398 :May M itra, the sun, rise and shine, joining and energising the earth with its rays and proper order of the seasons, and may a harmonious equation of Varuna, water, Vayu, air and wind, and Agni, temperature, create and maintain climatic and environmental conditionsfor a vast and great world order worth living in with peace and comfort. 
399 :(This divine voice enjoins the world powers to work for and maintain the proper environmental order which is urgently required at the present time of global warming and green house gases. If they don't, the warning is: peace and comfort would not be possible.) May Dhata, supreme controller and sustainer of the world order, Rati, powers that produce and give, Savita, creative energisers and inspirers, Tvashta, makers of new things and forms of life, listen favourably to my words and wishes. I pray to divine M other Nature, earth mother of the brave, so that I may abide at the centre of equals over the earth, indivisibe, inviolable as she is. 
400 :I invoke Soma, spirit of peace and happiness and the beauteous gifts of nature's greenery, and I invoke Savita, spirit of energy and creativity with humble reverence and offers of replenishment, and I pray for favourable phases of the sun over the year and call upon all brilliant children of light to shine higher and higher so that we may all be happy and happier. A nd may this Agni, light and fire of national yajna of humanity, our leader, keep on burning and enlightening without end, fed on by universal fraternity without a word of negation and mutual conflict. 
401 :O people of the world, bound in mutual love and common ambition, stay here only close by the centre of this universal yajna, go not far away, and may the lord protector, energiser and promoter sustainer lead you on the common drive. And may all Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity, be one and favourable with you for the fulfillment of this common aim of progress and enlightenment. 
402 :O people of the world, we honour your minds in unison, we salute your discipline and commitments in unison, and we value and adore your thoughts and resolves bound in unity. A nd as regards those that still stay out and stand apart from your ideals, we persuade and bring them too to be with you together. 
403 :I hold your minds together with mine. Come with your thoughts, ideas and values together with my thoughts, ideas and values. I win your hearts together bound in love with me. M oving thus together, join me, and move on together on the common path for a common goal. 
404 :Of the strong as well as of the weak, the heavenly lord is father, the earth is mother. (All are children of divinity.) Deal with them as they deserve. A s the holy one's did and do, so do you too after them. Ward off the evil ones. 
405 :Men free from violence, jealousy and indifference hold the world together against the bullies. The same is done by thinking men. I break down the trouble maker as the castrator emasculates the bull. 
406 :Let intelligent people joined together for positive purposes, bind vociferous force into strong bonds to restrict their movement, then castrate their pride and procreativity, and then channelise their energy for positive purposes. 
407 :O leaders of fame and intelligence joined together for positive purposes against vociferous strength of the brutes, by that very strength of the di vine giver of energy with which you act positively as light givers, be controllers of the trouble makers, keeping them down as the wise keep down the mischief of the doggish and bind the evil of the fiendish. 
408 :For reasons of your negativity, I shall bind you to wean you away. For that very reason I shall break down your vociferous force. A nd then, like fast chariot horses, you will move ahead on the right path by words of admonishment and reach your goal. 
409 :Hundreds are the disorders prevalent on the earth. For their prevention and counteraction you are raised to the high position in advance as antidote of the purest quality and transparence against evil, disorder and disease. 
410 :This sukta is a celebration with yajna at a new dawn. The night is over, a new dawn is come. The new dawn can be interpreted as the dawn of a new creation, dawn of the cosmos, as the dawn of a new year or the dawn of a new phase of history or a new phase in a person's life. It is a highly symbolic sukta. The words ' ratri' and 'ekashtaka' stand for Prakrti. 
411 :'Ashtaka' is a three day celebration on the 7th, 8th and 9th day after the full moon in the month of M agha which could be a practice after this sukta, but there is no such indication in the sukta. What is important is the yajnic celebration and prayers for prosperity, progress and progeny in the new phase of time. 
412 :There arises the new dawn, light of primal Shakti of the Divine, I ike the mother cow abundant in the milk of life for us in the Law Divine. May she, with milk overflowing bless us with higher and higher prosperity and joy year after year. 
413 :May the Ratri, abundant and generous Prakrti, and Dhenu, mother cow creative of existence, which is come up at the new dawn, whom the Devas celebrate with enthusiastic response, and which is the creative and sustaining partner Shakti of the Lord of Time through cosmic dynamics of the Law, be good and auspicious to us in the new age. 
414 :Ratri, generous motherly giver, is the creative symbol of the Lord of existence, and tangible metaphor of Time through mutability whom we worship, honour and celebrate. We pray, may the mother create and bless us with progeny with full age, good health, wealth, This is that primal Shakti which has arisen and shines, and which pervades and reflects in all these other forms and phases of existence. There are the greatest greats within the Space-time dimensions of it which she, the newly risen creative consort of the Lord of Time and existence has evolved and won in form. 
415 :Gravanas, dedicated soma makers who grind and distil the herbal essences, meditative missionaries of the vision of existence who penetrate into the depths of nature have raised their voice of joyous success, having created the holy yajnic materials for the new year's homage to the Divine from the beauti es and riches of the world of existence. O Ekashtake, sole mistress of divinity, pray bless us with noble progeny and brave heroes. May we be masters of versatile wealth, honour and excellence in the new age. 
416 :O sagely scholar of things in existence, watch, discover and then seize the successive stages of the constant evolution of divine nature in progress which is replete with the joyous beauty and grace of divinity. Study those who are organised in village and city, who are visionaries of natural knowledge and beyond, and what are the various phenomenal forms of existence. Watch the mutual relationship of these at peace in harmony, so that the peace and harmony may also exist between these of the environment and ourselves, within ourselves too. 
417 :Bless us, O Mother Nature, divine giver, with health, nourishment and increasing prosperity. May we ever abide and enjoy the favour and good will of the devas, generous powers of divinity and nobilities of humanity. O dispeller of darkness and misfortune, mother perfect and abundant, come from far and near, come ever more abundant with perfection again and again. Joining and enjoying ail our yajnas of creative action with surrender in homage, bring us abundance of food, energy, knowledge and enlightenment. 
418 :O Ekashtake, sole mother of existence, pray create and bring us, for all, noble progeny with good health and full age, bless us with wealth, honour and excellence in harmony with the environment. A nd then, through you, may come into our vision and experience your lord and master, the Only God of Time-Space continuum who pervades and superintends your constancy through mutability: Satyam and Rtam both. 
419 :I serve and replenish the seasons with yajna, I serve the powers that control the seasons such as sun and moon, earth and ai r, I serve the cycle of the seasons and the course of the years. I serve the years in full, years i n cycl e, months, and I serve the control ling factors of things in existence. 
420 :O Nature, I live in harmony with you and offer yajna for the seasons, cycle of the seasons, months, and years. I offer yajna in the service of the lord controller of the world, the supreme lord creator, for the lord giver of promotion and progress and the lord controller of all things in existence. 
421 :With Nature, earth and the cow in sonance with us, with ghrta held in hand in plenty, with yajna of homage and reverence, we serve the divinities in love and faith. Let us, thus, free from greed and selfishness, with plenty of lands, cows and light of culture, come home and there abide in peace and joy. 
422 :Ekashtaka, sole Prakrti, undergoing the hard discipline of the divine law of Rtam, bears the great spirit, cosmic and individual, in her womb and gives birth to the cosmic and the individual human purusha, Indra and indra. Thereby the divine deva powers fight out the enemies, negativities, and thus by divine and individual Indra become destroyers of evil and shine as masters of power and potential. 
423 :O mother of Indra, Divine Spirit, mother of soma, human spirit, you are the daughter of Prajapati, lord father and controller of universal creation. Pray fulfill our cherished desire. Pray accept our homage of thanks and gratitude in yajna. 
424 :O man, for a full and comfortable life, I immunize and save you from disease in general, yet unsuffered, and from tubercular and cancerous disease in particular with the fumes and fragrances of the holy oblations into the yajna fire, and if seizure, swoon or fainting fits take one on, then Indra and Agni, electric and warming treatment or sunlight and air may release him from that ailment. (The treatment is for prevention and cure both). Cf. Rg 10,161,1 If the patient is extremely debilitated, sunk beyond hope, almost goneto the brink of death, I touch and retrieve him from the depth of despair to live his full hundred years of life. (The word 'asparsham' suggests the efficacy of touch therapy.) With medicines, tonics and herbs of a thousandfold efficacy of light power, a hundred-fold vitality of havi capable of sustaining a hundred year span of life, I have brought this patient back to life as Indra, lord giver of life, takes him across all maladies and evils of the world to a full life of hundred years. 
425 :Live a hundred years, O patient, rising, growing, and advancing through autumn, winter and spring seasons. May Indra, divine spirit of power and glory of energy, Agni leading light and fireof life, Savita, divine spirit of regeneration, sustenance and inspiration, and Brhaspati, lord of Infinity and spirit of expansion, bless you to live a full hundred years span of life with hundredfold joy of fulfilment. Thanks, O Lord of life, I have brought him back to good health with the light, fire and fragrances of havi capable of giving a hundredfold vitality of life. 
426 :Let prana and apana vital energies enter forward I i ke two vi ri I e bul I s entering their stal I. Let others, causes of ill health, disease and death, get away, which aliens, they say, are hundreds. 
427 :Let prana and apana stay strong here. They must not go away from this youth. Let them sustain and strengthen his parts of the body system and, further, conduct him to live his full age of good health till fulfilment. 
428 :I assign you to full agetill completion. I energise you to live unto full old age. Let time and age bring you all that is good for well being. Let others, causes of ill health, disease and death, aliens all, getaway. They are hundreds, they say. 
429 :O man bound by age like a virile bull tied by rope, whom death seizes as soon as born, with beautiful snares of the world and holy bonds of nature's laws of Dharma, may Brhaspati, lord of Infinity beyond death, release and liberate you from these bonds of life and death with the hands of Truth and Dharma. 
430 :Here itself I build the house, here it may stand firm, safe in peace, abundant in the beauty and bliss of light and air. H ere, O blessed home, we may live together with noble children, all good and brave, unhurt and unassailed by any misfortune. 
431 :H ere itself, O noble house, stand fi rm, unshaken, full of horses, cows, and the truth and honesty of the inmates. Stay abundant in food and energy, milk and ghrta, and the supply of water. Rise and shine, giving us great joy and good fortune. 
432 :with large roof and terrace, full of boundless joy, unsullied store of food and calves frolicking around, and let vibrant cows rush back home in the evening. 
433 :Let Savita, specialist of sun light, Vayu, specialist of air and circulation, winds and wind directions, Indra, specialist of energy and electricity, and Brhaspati, specialist of light and space, each one knowing his subject and specialisation, design and build this house. Let the maruts, vibrant engineers, sprinkle it with ghrta and water. A nd let the ruler and the lord of prosperity, Bhaga, expand our farming, storage and distribution. 
434 :Protector of honour and social culture, comfortable shelter, clothed in beauty, shining with soothing light, you stand prominent, designed, built and decorated by brilliant builder artists with gifts of divine nature. Nestled in lawns and greenery, looking cheerful and inspiring, be good and give us plenty of health, wealth and honour with noble and brave progeny. 
435 :O Vansha, centre pillar of the house, flag pole of the family, family of the ancestral line, by virtue of thetruth and law of Divinity, rise on thefirm foundation, shining bright and blazing with honour and lustre, ward off and uproot all enemies and negativities. Let the inmates of the quarters of the house never suffer any hurt or injury. O sweet home, we pray we may live a full hundred years, all blest with noble progeny. 
436 :May children, teenagers and youth come to this house with others in friendly company of the world. May potfuls of milk, honey and ghrta flow in and over in this house. May jars of curds and potfuls of butter come to this house in abundance. 
437 :O lady of the house, fill this pot, keep itfull and flowing, let the stream of ghrtafull of the nectar sweets of hospitality be ever flowing. Keep this house full and treat all inmates and guests of the house with nectar sweet hospitality. It is the noble acts of piety, service and hospitality which protect and promote this house. 
438 :I bring these potfuls of water free from pollution and contagion, they cure and destroy consumptive and cancerous diseases, and I come home to my quarters and sit happy at peace with the immortal fire of yajna in company with the divines. 
439 :O waters which, on the break of the cloud, flow on together, roaring, roaring, for which reason you have the names 'nadyah', i.e., those that flow, roaring. For thatvery reason, your names are'Sindhavah', i.e., those that flow as floods. 
440 :('Nadyah' and Sindhavah are plural forms of ' nadi' and'sindhu'. Every stream isnadi and every river issindhu. Hence the river Indus also is called Sindhaor Sindhu which now is a particular name through the historical process of particularisation. But in the Veda, Sindhu is a general nameforany river, the reason being that it is the name of water flowing in flood anywhere.) Activated by Varuna, the sun, in the region of light, you move fast together, then Indra, electric energy in the middle regions, receives and joins you for catalysis, and thereby catalysed, you become' apah', i .e., waters received and pervaded by electricity. Therefore you are'apah', received, pervaded and worth receiving. 
441 :Flowing downwards according to your nature, character and innate desire, I ndra, electric energy in the firmament and the human soul on earth, received you for the welfare of life. Thus received as opted for by choice, your name is Vari, i.e., selected, elected and accepted with preference of one's own choice. 
442 :O waters, rushing according to your own will downwards, only one divine power stands high over you, and that is the sun. H ence you evaporate and rise. Hence your name is 'udaka', that which goes upward as vapours. 
443 :Waters are good and auspicious, they are ghrta, givers of splendour. They bear Agni and Soma, heat and cold, oxygen and hydrogen, positive and negative electric currents. May the inspiring spirit of these honeyed waters come to me auspiciously and bless me with pranic energy and splendid aura of personality. 
444 :I see through the waters. I hear through them. Their sound comes to me. Voice goes through them. O waters of golden beauty, born of fire, air and akasha, when I drink your sweets to my pleasure and satisfaction, I feel I have had a feast of nectar. 
445 :O waters of life worth attaining, this lifeflow is but your essence at heart. O streams of the life of truth and law incarnate, this life is but your child. O power and energies of life on the flow, come here to me in such a manner that I may receive into me the fluid essence of life, ultimately, the life that is yours. 
446 :O cows, we keep you well with a comfortable stall, in good environment with good food and with good methods of development. Whatever best we can provide in the day, with that we look after you. 
447 :nourishment help you grow. Let Brhaspati, the vast space, help you grow. Let I ndra and D hananjaya, natural energy and prana energy help you grow. Bring to me and let me grow with the wealth of nature and gifts of the cow. 
448 :Let the cows come and move around in this stall and on the meadows, free from disease, free from fear, bearing honey sweet of milk, most delicious, eating well and giving plenty of natural manure for crops. 
449 :gfg m.h'h?C i -?r^rer win i d Vt M;Hl4MM ^T: II ^ II Let the cows here in the stall grow and develop like lotus stalks, let them breed here itself, and let me too have full knowledge about them, their growth and development. 
450 :Let this stall be good for you. Grow here like honey bees. And breed here itself. With me myself like a head of family, we develop the cow wealth of the nation. 
451 :Let the cows love me and live with me, their master, protector and promoter. Let this stall, goshala, be good and auspicious for their growth and development. Abundantly growing and developing in number by wealth of milk, health and breed, living and growing with joy and prosperity, as the cows are, let us all, living beings, be close to the cows and improve their breed and quality. 
452 :I stir up and exhort I ndra, master spirit and centre pin of the business world, that he may come forward to us and be our leader and pioneer, giving incentive to the dullard, shaking up the niggardly non-giver, correcting the misappropriator and punishing the cruel grabber of other's share of wealth in the process of business. Ruling, controlling and organising, he should indeed be the giver and provider, not the grabber of wealth, for us. 
453 :Many are the paths worthy of noble businessmen, Devayanathey are, open and actively busy between the earth and sky over land and sea and air. Let these be available for me to follow, which would bring for me enough milk and ghrta for a comfortable living so that with trade and commerce, buying and selling, I can get the wealth I need and wish to have. 
454 :O leading light of life, divine Agni, with the desire for correct and creative business to my utmost power and passion for success with a hundred possibilities, I offer holy materials with ghrta into the lighted fire, controlling this divine intelligence of mine and worshipping Divinity with hymns of the Veda. 
455 :Pray bear with us, Agni, leading light of the business world, forgive us this our leap forward whereby we have come so far on the way. May our sale, purchase, resale and repurchase and our exchange of goods and money be auspicious and mutually very profitable. May both the partners accept and welcome this business proposition, and let our business grow higher and ever more propitious. 
456 :Agni, leading light of theworld of business, may the capital money I invest with which I carry on the business, and the money in circulation by which I wish and plan to earn more, O Devas, enlightened people, may that grow and increase. Let it not decrease. Agni, by virtue of our investment and the yajnic service we offer, pray ward off the deceitful players and destroyers of mutual gain. 
457 :O Devas, enlightened enterprising spirits of society, the money that I invest to carry on my business, wishing and planning to earn more by investment, may, I pray, increase, and may the business grow. A nd in that business, investment and money circulati on, may I ndra, the ruling power and self-confidence, Prajapati, presiding powers of nation's growth, Savita, men of creative spirit with inspiring enthusiasm, Soma, men of peace who care for national happiness, and Agni, leading lights of the world of business, science of growth and lovers of culture and enlightenment, may all provide mewith enlightened interestin business and the creative growth of economy for all round development of human society. 
458 :O hota, performer and organiser of the human nation's economic yajna, O Vaishvanara, universal spirit of life and light vibrating and shining at the heart of every human being, weadmire, adore and exaltyou with sal utati ons and offer of the best we have for the common good. O Lord, spirit of yajnic economy and spirit of universal growth, pray keep awake and be inspiring among our people, in our soul at heart, in the mind and senses, in our cows, keep vibrating in our pranic energies. Never let our universal awareness and individual and social enthusiasm wane away and subside into sleep. 
459 :O J ataveda, lord of universal wealth ever awake in every one, inspire us that we may create, bear and bring something as our share to your yajnic house as to the omnipresent harbinger of everything for us so that, O light of the world, Agni, asmembersof your universal family living under the same one roof, enjoying and rejoicing with food, energy, health and prosperity, we may never come to any harm in our life, individually and socially as one community, and never hurt anybody else. 
460 :Early morning we invoke Agni, lord of light, light the holy fire, and pray for the light of life. Early morning we invoke Indra and pray for honour and power. Early morning we invoke M itra and Varuna and pray for the energy of prana and udana. Early morning we invoke Bhaga and pray for strength, prosperity and life's glory. We invoke Pusha and pray for health and nourishment. We invoke Brahmanaspati, lord omniscient and infinite, and pray for knowledge and vision of divine grandeur. Early morning we invoke Soma and pray for peace and joy. Early morning we invoke Rudra and pray for love, justice and spiritual courage. 
461 :Early morning we invoke Bhaga, the glory of life, and pray for honour and prosperity, Bhaga, all victorious, lustrous child of Infinity, sustainer of the cosmic system which everybody whether poor and helpless, or fast and impetuous, or a ruling king, loves and honours and of which the Lord of L ife says: H onour B haga, acquire power and glory won by effort and action and enjoy life. 
462 :Lord of glory, lord of inspiration for advancement, I ord of truth and benef i cence, I ord of I i ght and knowledge, blest us as you have with intelligence, we pray, save this intelligence of ours from sin and lead us to the vision of divinity. Lord of power and prosperity, help us grow with cows and horses, let us advance with manpower, bless us with men of vision and leaders of quality. 
463 :Maghavan, magnanimous lord of honour and prosperity, we pray, we may be prosperous at the present time, and we may be prosperous at the rise of the sun. Let us prosper at the middle of the day, and let us be prosperous in the evening. Let us always abide in the good will and guidance of the noble saints and sages and brilliant leaders of light and wisdom. 
464 :TheLord of Glory aloneisthelord of glory and munificence. May he alone be our Deva, lord of light and generous giver. By his grace alone can we be great and prosperous. O Lord so glorious, I invoke and worship you with prayer as do all all-ways worship and pray. O Lord of glory, be our guide, leader and promoter The lights of the dawn, inspired and inspiring to silence and prayer, advancing like the sun's golden chariot for the performance of yajnic acts of love and creation, may, we pray, bring us the most modern treasures of honour and prosperity j ust I i ke fastest horses flying chariot-loads of a hero's trophies of victory. 
465 :The holy dawns replete with vapours, blestwith sun beams, pregnant with energy and abundant and generous with bliss may, we pray, sanctify our home and, bringing showers of ghrta and water, may fill our lifewith all round prosperity. And may you all, brilliant powers of nature and humanity rising like the dawn, protect and promote us with good fortune for all time. 
466 :M en of vision and creativity use the plough and the yoke. Men of constancy among the brilliant and generous separately as well as together expand the beauty and graces of life devoutly thus for peace and well being. 
467 :Work with the plough and yoke the bullocks. Expand and develop agriculture and its methods, tools and knowledge. Prepare the soil and sow the seed. O brilliant and prosperous farmers, when the grain is ripe for harvesting, reap and bring the harvest home. 
468 :The plough, fitted with share, symbol of peace and joy, a tool of soma, plenty, prosperity and happiness, drawn by bullocks strong enough to draw a chariot and held firmly by the hilt, turns up the crust of the productive earth to make it ready for sowing. 
469 :Let Indra, the farmer, take over and look after the furrow with seed. Let the sun shine over the seed and protect and promote the growth. LetPusha, fertility of nature, feed, energise and promote the crop. A nd let the earth mother, full of the milk of life, produce more and more of pure foods year by year for us. 
470 :Let the ploughmen plough the land happily for our peace and nourishment. Let the farmers work with oxen and horses happily for peace. May the sun and air w ith the obi ati ons of rich material s offered by us i n yajna bless the herbs and plants with delicious fruit and nourishing grain. 
471 :carry the burdens happily for growth and prosperity. Let the men work happily. Let the plough furrow the field neatly, I et the bonds be tied neatly, and let the goad be raised well and kindly for growth and prosperity. 
472 :O sun and wind, farmers and helpers, listen to me: the water which you create in the regions of light and the firmament and move in the light of knowledge, bring that down to irrigate this holy land of the fields. 
473 :O charming furrow, be straight and deeply well drawn, promising and productive. We love and celebrate you so that you may be good to us, bring us good fortune and bring us the best fruit of our labour and endevour. 
474 :Let the furrow in the field made by the plough share and levelled and refined by the leveller, accepted and approved by all noble and generous people, and vitalised by wind and rain, be enriched with the wealth of food, energy, milk and ghrta and bring us plenty of delicious nourishment. 
475 :The theme of this hymn on the surface seems to be getting rid of a co-wife or a mistress, for which the speaker takes recourse to either a magic spell or a magical herb. But this does not do justice to the deeper meaning of the hymn. Thetheme is integration, and still better, the reimtegration of a divided, disintegrated, distracted, addicted, schizophrenic personality. The cure of split personality can be both herbal and psychological. The word 'upanishat', 'upadha' helps us to read the hymn in this direction of practical yoga in which sanative herbs, mental concentration and spiritual faith, all play an important role. 
476 :I dig out this luxuriant and most powerful herb by which one can annul a rival fascination and recover a single, united mind and personality with one all- absorbing love and interest. 
477 :O sanative herb, growing with luxuriant leaves and branches, nobly effective, divinely energised, giver of peace, patience and courageous inner vitality, transform meto concentrate on my single and only love and interest. Throw out my rival fascination. Let me be with my own essential master spirit. 
478 :I do not even entertain your name, O vile fascination. Nor do you feel interested in this master spirit of mine. We throw this remote and far off fascination at the farthest. 
479 :O sanative herb of soma nature, you are higher than the rival, more efficacious than the distraction. I also am higher than the fasciantion, greater than all others who are superior, generally speaking. May that which is my rival be lower than the lowest infatuations. 
480 :I am patient, challenging and victorious. You too are unassailable Soma. You and I, both challenging and victorious, shall subdue the rival. 
481 :O Soma spirit of the herb, I love you at heart and hold on to you in faith, patient and victorious as you are. I hold on to you with a determined mind. May your spirit radiate and come to me like the mother cow hastening to her calf, and water rushing straight to the lake. 
482 :Crystal sharp and powerful is this, my song of Divinity, immaculate potent my strength and valour, inviolable and imperishable be the Kshatra, refined and glorified, of which I am the celebrant high priest whose I strengthen, refine, energise and integrate the Rashtra and the lustre, valour and power of these brave heroes, and with this kind of inputs I break the arms and forces of the enemies. 
483 :Down may those fall and stay below who challenge our brave and majestic ruler. With universal knowledge of the Veda and advice of the wise I deplete the unfriendly of their strength and power, and I raise those who are ours and support our universal vision. 
484 :Sharper are they than the axe's edge, hotter than blazing fire, and deadlier than thunder of the cloud, whose high priest I am. 
485 :I sharpen and sophisticate their arms and armaments, I raise and advance the R ashtra of the brave. May the Rashtra of these heroes be undecaying and imperishable, and victorious, and may the divinities of the world protect and promote the unity of their mind and resolve. 
486 :O lord of glory, let the warlike mind and morale of the fighting forces be high, let the victory roar of the conquering heroes rise and rumble in space, let the flag bearers' shouts of joy rise high in every part of the land, and let the brilliant blazing leaders march forward with their stormy forces under command of Indra, the supreme commander. 
487 :O brave leaders, march forward, win the battles, let your arms be blazing invincible. O warriors of blazing arms, ferocious weapons and sharp unfailing arrows and deadly missiles, destroy the feeble, demoralised, ill-equipped enemy. 
488 :O volley of arrows and missiles shot and charged, sharpened and calibrated with the highest knowledge and expertise, go far and fall upon the targets. Conquer the foes, go fast forward, take the best ones of the enemy one by one, let none of them be spared. 
489 :Hey Agni, O man, this home, this world of Prakrti, this teacher's home, this vedi, is your origin, your place of birth according to the time and season of growth and development. B orn of here and as you grow, you shine. Knowing the place of origin and the stage of growth, you rise and advance and thus create and increase the wealth of life for us. 
490 :Agni, lord omniscient, O brilliant teacher, O enlightened man, speak to us well and straight, be kind at heart with us. O lord and leader of the people, give us the wealth of life, light of the spirit, you are the giver of wealth, light and life. 
491 :May Aryama, lord controller of the stars and planets, man of justice and rectitude, leader of men, Bhaga, lord of glory and prosperity, Brhaspati, lord of infinite space and man of divine knowledge, Devi, divine lights of nature, mother teacher and speaker of the natural language of pure truth and laws of life, bless me with the real wealth of life. 
492 :With honest and earnest voice of the heart, we invoke, adore and pray to Soma, lord of peace and joy, Raja, refulgent ruler of the world, Agni, light and fire of life, Aditya, self-refulgent sun, Vishnu, all pervasive spirit of cosmic sustenance, Surya, refulgent sustainer of earth and life on earth, Brahmana, speaker of the Vedic lore, and Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe and Infinity. We invoke them for protection and advancement. 
493 :Hey Agni, lord self-refulgent, O enlightened and radiant spirit of knowledge, with flames of yajna fire, reflections of light and through kind and brilliant teachers inspire, energise and increase our knowledge of the spirit, our yajnic social order and our spirit of piety, unity and charity. O lord refulgent, kind and generous, bless us with wealth and inspire us with the spirit of charity and magnanimity. 
494 :Here in our life at our time of growth and development, we invoke, adore and worship Indra and Vayu, givers of power and life's vibrancy. They are both generous, charitable and hospitable. We adore them as our ideal benefactors so that all our people be united in form and mind and feel inspired with the spirit of yajna and charity as a nation. 
495 :O Agni, lord self-refulgent, inspire Aryama, powers of justice, rectitude and leadership, Brhaspati, scholars and teachers of divine knowledge about life and the world, Indra, lord ruler and controller of the nation's powers, inspire and energise them to be moving in the direction of charity and liberality. Also inspire and energise Vata, air and pranic energy, Vishnu, the nation's spiritof yajna, joint creativity and united action, Sarasvati, spirit of knowledge, education and enlightened motherly women, Savita, spirit of inspired productivity and enlightenment, and Vajin, those who produce and control food and other powers of society so that the nation may be one, united, powerful and generous. 
496 :Vajasya nu prasave sain babhuvimemd ca visva bhuvananyantah. Utaditsantam dapayatu prajdnan rayim ca nah sarvavlram ni yaccha. 
497 :Let us be united together for the development of knowledge and the production of food, energy and power. Indeed all these worlds of existence are one and united within the same ultimate cosmic order. May the same refulgent and generous power convert even the ungiving selfish to giving generosity. And O Lord, give us the wealth which comprises total heroism and magnanimity of the human nation. 
498 :May all the directions of space and all five orders of society bless me with food and strength for body, mind and soul, may all wide earths, stars and planets bless me, so that I may obtain all kinds of thought, ideas and spirit of divinity with my heart and mind in unison with the human community. 
499 :Let me speak the cultured language of knowledge and divine awareness. O Lord of light, raise me with the light and lustre of life. May Vayu, divine vibrancy of life protect me all round and stop me from going astray. May Tvashta, divine spirit of refinement, bear and bring me all round nourishmentfor body, mind and soul. 
500 :In honour and service to those fires, forms of divine energy, which are in the waters, in the cloud, in the human being, in the rocks, and which have entered into herbs and trees and inspire them to play their role in life, to these fires is this oblation offered in homage for peace. 
501 :The fire that is in the soma herb, that which has entered into the cows, in the birds and in the animals of the wild forest, that which coexists with the soul of humans and the quadrupeds, to all those fires, let this oblation be offered in homage for peace. 
502 :That fire of life which vibrates with the soul and powers its body chariot, universal with humanity, and inspires as well as burns all with the passion to live, that fire of passion and enthusiasm which I love and live in the battles of life, to all those fires let this oblation be offered in homage for peace. 
503 :That fire divine which consumes the world of existence, which they call 'Kama', the passion of love f or I if e, w hi ch they say i s the gi ver as w el I as the recei ver, constant, invariable, mighty, universal and overpowering, indomitable, to all these fires, this oblation is offered in homage for peace. 
504 :and all five communities of the world realise and recognise as main conductor of the yajna of life, to all thesefiery forms of yours, lustrous, honourable, truthful and holy, this oblation in homage for peace. 
505 :To the fire forms of the self-expressive energy of the burden - bearer of the universe as well as passionate forms of the food of life, to the fire forms of the graces of life, to the fires which bear and bring the peace, pleasure and ecstasy of life, to the fire forms of the omniscient lord creator, to the highest fire forms of the self-expression of the universal spirit of humanity, to all these fire forms of divine creative energy, this oblation in homage! To those fires which radiate across the regions of light, which magnetise the earth and shake the middle regions, which flash and thunder with the lightning, those which energise the quarters of space and blow into the winds, to all these fire forms of divine energy, this oblation in homage for peace. 
506 :We invoke Savita, creator and inspirer whose golden hands bear infinite mercy and generosity, we invoke Indra, lord omnipotent who destroys the forces of destruction, Brhaspati, lord infinite and omniscient, Varuna, lord of judgement and freedom of choice, M itra, lord of love as warmth of the sun, Agni, spirit of light and sustenance of life, we invoke all divine powers of nature and noble humanity, and we invoke all the spirits of life and breath of life, we invoke all these and pray: fulfil, pacify and subside this fire and let it be self- extinguished to leave the spirit free. 
507 :Calm is the fire of carnivorous passion, calm is the fire that eats into the vitals of man. And, indeed, I have extinguished the carnivorous fire that destroys the universal vitality of life. 
508 :(T h e reader w ou I d reaI i se that th e d i vine energy which manifests as warmth of the sun and as vitality of nourishment and sustenance of life is not the only fire form in life, but all that energy which is disruptive, consumptive and cancerous and works through germs, viruses and negative cel Is is also energy. It is this energy, this fire which is carnivorous, and this must be extinguished. One is positive, the other is negative. One is to be fulfilled, the other is to be extinguished. The end result of both fulfilment and extinguishment is peace.) Soma bearing mountains, holy waters, air, wind and cloud, all places exposed to the sun, they counter and extinguish the cancerous, consumptive, carnivorous fire. 
509 :Let the honour and lustre of life, strong and graceful as the vigour and splendour of the elephant, which is born of Mother Nature, grow and expand without bounds. May all the divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity in unison, M other Nature and the divine voice of Veda in love and accord with me vest me with that vigour, honour and splendour. 
510 :May M itra, sun and natural warmth, Varuna, waters of oceans and space and divine j udgement, prana, apana and udana energies, Rudra, natural immunity and divine mercy, all the divine powers which sustain the world, bless me with strength, lustre and grace. 
511 :The lustrous energy by which the elephant has grown so strong, by which the ruler grows great and majestic among men and in the grand affairs of life, by which eminent Devas, divinities of nature and brilliant men, attainto and maintain their divinity, by thatvigour and lustre, O Agni, now make me rise to greatness and glory. 
512 :O Jataveda, omniscient Agni, self-refulgent spirit of existence, as long as the flame of fire rises by yajna, as long as the lustre of the sun, vibrancy of pranic energies and strength of the elephant lasts and rises, that long and that far and high, O Ashvins, complementary harbingers of nature's divine energy and grace, and the beauty and fragrance of the lotus flower, pray vest me with the lustre and glory of life like the flames of yajna fire fed on and raised by oblations of ghrta. 
513 :As far as the four quarters of space extend, as far as the eyes can reach, that far and that high may the vigour and lustre of body, mind and soul, likethe vigour of the elephant's, be vested in me by the grace of j ataveda. 
514 :Of the animals, the elephant is steady, sure and comfortable without disturbance. With the strength, vigour, lustre and regality likethe elephant's, I vest and raise myself. 
515 :Note: M an can get strength, vigour, lustre and constant steadiness from divine nature, by living in close contact with it and not by going away from it. A nd the example of strength, vigour, lustre and grace from the world of nature is the elephant, notthelion. Satavalekar in his note on this sukta makes a significant observation: the elephant is herbivorous, not carnivorous. Real strength, vigour, lustre and steady grace can be gained from life itself, not through the destruction of life. The humans therefore should be vegetarians for gaining vigour and lustre of the graceful sort. 
516 :The cause by which you have become infertile, unable to conceive and carry, we remove from you and take it elsewhere far from you. (The remedy suggested by the mantra seems both medical and surgical.) Let the living embryo come into your womb and be like an arrow in the quiver, and let the ten month mature bonny brave baby take birth for you here in the home. 
517 :Bear a brave virile son, and after that too let brave virile son be born. Bea proud mother of the brave, of those that are born and of those you would bear. 
518 :Auspicious are the seeds and vitalities of life which fertility herbs produce. With the use of them increase your fertility and bear a brave child. Such as you are, be a fertile woman and a brave mother. 
519 :O woman, I create fertility and motherly potential for you in your system. Let the living embryo be in your womb. Be blest with a son who may be a boon for peace and joy for you, and for him, you too be the mother of peace and joy for his soul. 
520 :Those herbs of which the sun, the light of heaven, and the self-refulgent Lord Supreme is the father, and the earth is the mother, and the sea and the cosmic ocean is the root, may those divine herbs bless you, protect you and increase your fertility to get brave progeny. 
521 :E xuberant succulant are the herbs w ith honeyed life energy, so sweet and full of life's essence be my word. And I pray I may bear the honey sweets of the milk of life a thousand ways. 
522 :creates abundant food and lush green fields of corn waving and overflowing with the milk of life, and which bears and brings all that which is in the house of the unyajnic person too. That superabundant and generous power we invoke and worship. 
523 :Let all these five quarters of earth and space, and these five classes of humanity settled and working create and bring about abundance and prosperity as showers of rain bring aboutfloods of rivers and the curse of drought is no more. 
524 :A nd let this food, wealth and prosperity of ours, dynamic and flowing in athousand streams, be abundant and inexhaustible as the perennial oceanic cloud of space vapours is, raining in a hundred and thousand showers. 
525 :H undred - handed, bring in, collect. Thousandhanded, pour out, distribute, give. Of the done, and of what is to be done, of actual and potential, current and possible, create overflowing abundance. 
526 :Three parts of the national production and i ncome belong to the G andharvas, departments of earth and the environment, defence and administration, and culture and education of the nation, four parts belong to the ladies of the homes for upkeep and maintenance of the house and the family. Of these seven parts of the production, incomeand distribution, whatever is the best and most profitable way for the nation, we, the Executive-in-Council, provide for you. 
527 :O Prajapati, supreme ruler and protector of the earth and her children, Upoha and Samuha, Yoga and Kshema, collection and managemant, income and expenditure including reserve and disbursement, these two are the main departments of governance and administration. May these two bring you great, abundant and undiminishing value and return for the nation's economy and progress. 
528 :This sukta begins with the voice of passion, violent passion indeed (verses 1-3). Verses 4-6 are the call of reason for canalisation of passion into love for fulfilment with balance and settlement into the sacred state of marriage and family life. In fact hymns from 21 to 25 form a unit by themselves: 21 celebrates various forms of fire and energy including sex and love and ends with the word 'ashishamam', 'I have pacified the fire', the aids are given in verse 10. There can be no achievement in life without the passion to work and achieve (22). In family life, the man and wife, both in unison, live, love, work forfulfilmentand look forward to achieve continuity and futurity through progeny. H ence sukta 23 i s dedi cated to the cure of steri I ity. O nee family life is blest with love, cooperation, happy progeny and promising futurity, you work for prosperity, and that is celebrated in sukta 24 from family level to the ultimate social level. And hymn 25 is dedicated to passion in balance with reason in a state of marital fidelity, a union of nature, society and Dharma. 
529 :Violent passion shakes you up. You would not beat peace in your own comfortable bed: no sleep. The arrow of love which is devouring ferociously, with that I pierce and dig into your heart. 
530 :Having put on the bow the arrow sharpened with desire, winged with shooting pain, fatally aimed and pointed, the bow string stretched to the optimum, let love tear through your heart. 
531 :The arrow of passion aimed and pointed with fatal wings for the target is burning and blood sucking, which scorches up the last drop of blood in the liver and spleen. With that I pierce your heart through and through. 
532 :O love lorn maiden, afflicted with burning fiery passion, your lips parched and mouth dry, soft and sweet of manner and speech, free from anger and pride, attached to my sole love, come vow bound to me and join in the sacramental bond of matrimony. 
533 :Bound in wedlock with you, O loving maiden, I take you and lead you away from your mother and father so that you may be one with me in the holy performance of our sacred duties and one in heart and soul with me. 
534 :O M itraandVaruna, lord of love and judgement, divinities of loyalty and sound discretion, for her sake, castoff all other interests from her heart and mind, and having freed her from all other interests, let her accept only my love and home. 
535 :O Devas, divine powers natural and human, who abide upfront in the east direction, your name and identity in action being 'hetis', thunderbolt and thunderous voice, your arrows being fiery energy, Agni, the light of truth, the voice that enlightens, inspires and overwhelms, pray be kind and gracious to us, speak to us. Honour and salutations to you in homage in truth of thought, word and deed! O Devas who abide on the right in the southern quarter, your name in action and identity being 'Avishyus', eager to defend and protect, your arrows being Iove and desi re to see us grow and advance, pray be kind and gracious to us, speak to us. Honour and salutations to you in homage in truth of thought, word and deed! O Devas who abide at the back in the western quarter, your name in action and essence being 'Vairajas', the radiant, your arrows being A pah, waters, holy actions for peace and enlightenment, pray be kind and gracious to us, speak to us. Honour and salutations to you in homage in truth of thought, word and deed! O Devas who abide on the left in the northern quarter, your name in action and essence being 'Pravidhyantah', sharp shooters and transfixers, your arrows being 'vatah' wind shear missiles, pray be kind and gracious to us, speak to us, never fail to communicate. Honour and salutation to you in homage in truth of thought, word and deed! O Devas who abide below in the nether quarter, your name, action and identity in the essence being 'Nilimpas', stationed and fixed, your equipment being 'oshadhayah', herbs, sanatives and food, pray be kind and gracious to us, keep on speaking to us, never fail to communicate. Honour and salutationsto you in homage in truth of thought, word and deed! O Devas who abide on the heights above in the upper quarters, your name, action and comprehensive essence being 'Avasvantah', all-over protectors as total cover, your weapon and power being 'Brhaspati', supreme commander, pray be kind and gracious to us, speak to us for total security. Honour and salutationsto you in homage in truth of thought, word and deed! Agni, lord of light and omniscience, isthe ruling lord and guardian spirit upfront of the eastern quarter, protecting us against darkness, evil and ignorance, his arrows, protective powers, being sun-rays and theAditya pranas. Honour and adoration to all of them! Worship and prayers to the ruling lord, salutations to the protective powers, honour and admi ration to the arrows, praise and admiration for all these. O lord, whoever bears hate and jealousy toward us, or whoever we hate and reject, all that we deliver unto your divine justice. 
536 :On the right in the southern quarter, Indra, mighty controller of all crooked forces of the world, is the ruling lord and guardian spirit, his arrows being Pitr pranas and the light of knowledge and senior wisdom. Honour and adoration to all of them! Homage and worship to the ruling lord, homage and service to the protectors, honour and reverence to the arrows, homage and reverence to all these. O lord, whoever bears hate and jealousy toward us, and whoever or whatever we hate to suffer, all thatwedeliver unto your divinejustice. 
537 :At the back in the western quarter, Varuna, mighty controller of all poisonous forces of the world, is the ruling lord and guardian spirit, his arrows being food and immunity. Honour and adoration to all of them! Homage and worship to the ruling lord, homage and service to the protectors, honour and reverence to the arrows, homage to all these. O lord, whoever bears hate and jealousy toward us, and whoever or whatever we hate to suffer, all that we deliver unto your divinejustice. 
538 :On the left in the northern quarter, Soma, lord eternal, self-existent controller of self-created negativities is the ruling lord and guardian spirit, his arrows being electric currents of cosmic force. Homage and adoration to all of them. Homage of worship to the ruling lord, homage and service to the protectors, honour and reverence to the arrows, homage and reverence to all these. O lord, whoever hates us or whoever we hate Netherward in the lower quarters, Vishnu, all pervasive lord of yajna, is the ruling guardian spirit, controller of greenery, his arrows being herbs and trees. Homage to all of them. Worship to the ruling lord, homage to the protectors, to the arrows, to all of these. O lord, whoever hates us, whoever we hate to suffer, all that we deliver unto your divine justice. 
539 :Upward in the higher quarters, Brhaspati, lord of infinity, saviour against drought and desert of life, is the ruler and guardian spirit, his arrows being rain and grace. Homage to all of them. Worship to the ruling lord, homage to the protectors, to the arrows, to all of these. O lord, whoever hates us, whoever we hate to suffer, all that we deliver unto your divine justice. 
540 :Yamini isthelaw and process of life's evolution. Where the law and the process are violated, progress stops, the movement turns downwards. There is a time and season for every thing in nature, violate the time and season and the thing ends up in nothing. 
541 :This universe has come into existence by the creation and evolution of things one by one. In here, the creator of things has created all things and forms through the process of the law of universal evolution. W here the process is disturbed, it goes against the law, violates the time and season, and the violation leads to destruction, hurting and injuring humans and animals alike. (This mantra is a warning against the human violation of the earth and its environment.) This process, of negative character, grows cruel and omnivorous, and it destroys humans and animals alike. Hence people should refer this counter-evolution back to the Veda and the divine law of evolution, because this way only would the process be positive, auspicious and blissful once again. 
542 :O divine process of evolution, Yamini, be good and auspicious to humanity, good and kind to cows and horses, good and auspicious to this entire area of the earth, be good and gracious to us all here in our earthly home, be here with us all time, all seasons. 
543 :O Yamini, when you are here with us all time, all seasons, then growth is here, nectar joy and flavour of life is here, a thousandfold of wealth and victory. Be the giver of thousand gifts. O Yamini, give life and nourishment to all living beings. 
544 :Where people are good at heart, noble and pious of action, and where they reside and rejoice, having banished all their physical ailments, there surely, Yamini has come, joined and blest the people. May Yamini, spirit of the divine law of nature, never hurt us, humans and animals all. 
545 :W herever in the land people are good at heart, dedicated to noble action and committed to the performance of agni-hotra, there, for sure, Yamini loves to abide with the people in unison. We pray, may this divine spirit of nature's law, evolution and human progress never forsake us, never hurt us, our people or our animals. 
546 :W hen the councillors of the ruling president of the nation, who carry on the administration, receive and allocate one sixteenth of the national income from Purtta, the usual, and Ishta, special, resources such as agriculture and industry, under different heads, then the ruler who rules and protects the nation, having been given that financial power, essential, white and self- supporti ve, rel eases those funds for the purposes decided and provides freedom to the people from want and worry. 
547 :The tax money, paid and allocated, white, essential and protective-promotive, helps fulfill all plans and projects of the nation, current, completive, and projected including contingent and emergent ones, according to the i ntenti ons and resol uti ons of the peopl e, and neither fails to achieve the goal nor causes disruption of the plans for want of resources. 
548 :Whoever gives his part of the national-saving and protective-promotive contribution jointly agreed and approved by the people rises to that happy position of self-settlement and social cohesion where no forced payment in money or labour is to be made by the poor to the rich and the powerful. (This state of the voluntary performance of one's duty at the level of the citizens, administrators and even the ruler is that state of being and governance where the weaker sections of the community would have exemptions and freedoms otherwise rare in an establishment of selfish nature. Exemptions, safeguards and freedoms duly structured and provided are an essential part of a happy political economy.) The voluntary giver of his national-saving, protective-promotivecontribution, agreed and approved by the people, meant for the sustenance and advancement of a five-community vibrant nation lives happy, free from worry and violence in the land of his forefathers. 
549 :The voluntary giver of his national-saving, protective-promotivecontribution, agreed and approved by the people, meant for the sustenance and advancement of a five-community vibrant nation lives happy, free from worry and violence in the land illumined by the sun and beatified by the moon where days are bright and nights are soothing and peaceful. 
550 :Firm as earth and deep as unfathomable sea of inexhaustible waters, such a man (ruler aswell as citizen doing his duty) fears no fall. The nation of ruler and people, both united as twin divine A shvins or as prana and apana energies of the living system, fears no fall whilethetwo sustain the mother land against all possible negativities. 
551 :Who gives this homage of contribution? To whom? Forwhat? It is love that gives. T o love, for love, it gives. Love is the giver. Love is the receiver. It is love that enters and rolls in the ocean of existence. 
552 :A nd so says the mother earth: I receive you and welcome you with love. It is all a play of divine love, it is all for you, O man, child of Divinity. 
553 :The Benediction: May the earth receive you with love. May this expansive space receive you with love. The Promise: O Lord, let me, never by prana, never by soul, never by my people, transgress the bond of love. Having been received by earth and space, having received this cherished gift of life, let me never transgress the bond of piety. 
554 :(The bond is between the ruler and the people at the earthly level. The bond is between the Creator and the creature at the spiritual level.) I create you as a community with love at heart, unity of mind and freedom from hate and jealousy. Let everyone love everyone and all others as the sacred, inviolable mother cow loves and caresses the new born baby calf. 
555 :Let son be dedicated to father, one at heart and in mind, and with mother, in love and loyalty to family values and tradition. Let wife speak to husband in words sweet as honey conducive to love and peace in the family. 
556 :Let not brother hate brother nor si ster hate si ster. Let all, united in love and cooperation, dedicated to common values and like ideals, speak with language conducive to the realisation of common and universal good. 
557 :That noble knowledge and awareness, and that state of divine peace and piety, do we create in your homes for people by virtue of which noble people do not fall apart, nor do they mutually oppose, nor treat each other with hate and jealousy. 
558 :Even though excelling and surpassing one another, stay united at heart, all of equal mind. Never disunite, never separate, goon, achieve the goal, bearing social responsibilities together, moving like spokes of the wheel on the centre axle. Go forward calling and exhorting one another with words of love and encouragement. I have created you all and join you all as one community, one at heart, one in mind as one nation, one family. 
559 :Let your water centre be one in common, let your food be one in common and shared. I bind you all together i n one common, comprehensive bond of spi rit. Serve only one fire, the same one in yajna together like the spokes wheeling round one hub at the centre. 
560 :The Benediction: I join you all in one common lovewith onecommon loyalty as one community under one command, working together in unison with one heart and mind. Like brilliant, illuminative, generous and creative divinities protecting and promoting the nectar spirit of life's joy, be all of you happy at heart day and night, celebrating the joyous unity of life. 
561 :Let Devas, brilliant, illuminative, generous creative powers in humanity be free from decrepitude O Agni, man of brilliance and enthusiasm, keep away from meanness and niggardliness. Let me be far away from all sin. Let me be free from cancer and consumption, let me be happy with good health and long age. 
562 :and adversity. Let the powerful keep away from evil doing, let me be free from cancer and consumption, and happy with good health and long age, free from all sin. 
563 :D omestic animals keep away from forest beasts, waters keep away from thirst and drought. Let me be away from sin and disease, happy with good health and long life. 
564 :This heaven and this earth are separate. Various paths go in different directions. Let me too be free from all sin, free from cancer and consumption, and happy with good health and long age. 
565 :his daughter after marriage and is free from responsi bi I ity. T hi s entire universe goes on, each parti cl e being separate. Let me too be away from all sin, free from cancer and consumption, and happy with good health and full long age. 
566 :Agni, holds and sustains pranic energies for the system, so is the moon joined with the pranic energies. Let me be free from all sin, free from cancer and consumption, joined with good health and long age. 
567 :With the force of pranic energies, divine powers of the universe move the all-round mighty sun. May I too, free from all sin, keep off cancer and consumption and be joined with good health and a long full age. 
568 :O J iva, living soul, by the energy and inspiration of long-living divine personalities and those divine forces which sustain and strengthen good health and cherished age, keep death away, die not prematurely. Let me be free from all sin, keep off cancer and consumption, and enjoy a long full age with good health. 
569 :O J iva, living soul, live and breathe by thepranic energy of the divine sources of prana. Live on here, die not too soon. Let me, too, free from all sin, keeping away cancer and consumption, enjoy full age with good health. 
570 :Rise with life energy. Live on with life energy. Live on and rise by the life-giving juice of vital herbs. Let me, too, free from all sin, free from cancer and consumption, enjoy full age with good health. 
571 :Let us live and rise high by the showers of divine rain. Let us rise to immortality beyond death. Let me, too, be free from all sin. Let me be free from cancer and consumption. Let me enjoy a long full age with good health. 
572 :The loving, faithful, visionary sage visualizes the infinite spirit of the universe, first, eternal, and directly manifested from the bounds of brilliant stars. Various stars and planets abiding in space are reflections of the presence of the Spi rit. 11 is that Spi rit which bri ngs into existence Prakrti, mother cause of what is in nature and what is yet to be. 
573 :May this holy light of intelligence, received from the universal creative Spirit and shining across the regions of the universe and her children, move forward and rise higher in the service of the first and original cause of the birth of the world. In honour of that Lord, first creator and sustainer, may all people inculcate and advance this brilliant, redoubtable and inspiring vision and passion for enlightenment. 
574 :That omnipresent and omniscient Spirit which binds and holds this universe together, evolves the specific forms and functions of all divine powers of the universe and proclaims its own existence. That Spirit, Brahma, raises Prakrti from its own self, raises its own voice of the Veda loud and bold, and abides by its Prakrti Shakti everywhere from the centre up and down all round. 
575 :He alone sustains heaven and earth, the great firmament and expansive space in order through the divine law of nature. He alone sustains the mighty universe. Omnipresent, self-manifested, he pervades the heaven and earth and all particles of matter and energy like a very home of divinity. 
576 :He, Brhaspati, mighty lord of Infinity, isthefirst and foremost self refulgent power and ruler of all that is in existence, from the centre to the circumference, pure immaculate spirit of the cosmic day born of light divinein which brilliant and vibrant sages abide through meditation and yajnic action. 
577 :For sure, that poetry of this lord, Veda, and the beautiful world, celebrates the glory of this omnipotent, self-refulgent, eternal Brahma which arises thus at the dawn of cosmic day along with the infinite variety that it is now, which in the earlier half lay dormant in the state of sleep. 
578 :Whoever with homage and humility approaches Brhaspati, lord of Infinity, eternal immutable, kind as a parent, ordainer and sustainer of the noble, as brother, saying: "You, O lord, are the sole creator and protector of all that is in the universe", that poetic visionary would rise to a state of essential strength of mind and spirit where no one can possibly deceive, suppress or subdue him. 
579 :Which lord divine shall we worship with homage and havi? He that is the giver of spiritual courage and vision of the soul, strength of body and mind, whose order and command all enlightened persons and divinities of nature obey all over the world, who rules over the entire world of humanity, animals and birds, thatlord of peaceand bliss shall weworship with homage and havi. 
580 :Which lord divine shall we worship with homage of havi? Who by hismightisthesoleone ruler of the world of sense and pranic energy, whose shade of protection means nectar joy and immortality, and off- the-shade means death, that lord of peace and bliss shall we worship with homage and havi. 
581 :Which lord divine shall we worship with homage of havi? On whom mutually sustained heaven and earth seek for support, whom sun and earth moving in orbit under cosmic force call upon for balance, who creates and comprehends that extensive path of space for the parti cl es of matter and energy, that I ord of peace and power shall we serve and worship with homage and havi. 
582 :Which lord divine shall we worship with homage of havi? By whose power and law the wide heavens, the great earth, the extensive skies and the sun all abide and sojourn far and wide in space, that lord of peace, power and bliss shall we serve and worship with homage and havi. 
583 :Which lord divine shall we worship with homage of havi? By whose power and glory all mountains of the world capped with snow stand and rise in majesty, the stream of universal waters flows in space and the sea, whose voice, they say, resounds in space, whose arms extend as these quarters of space, that lord of peace and majesty shall we worship with homage and havi. 
584 :W hich lord divine shall we worship with havi? By whose power and presence, before the re-emergence of the state of objective existence, the potential dynamics of Prakrti bearing the blue-print of the universe in its womb, and the immortal souls, all under the state of eternal law, abide, over which, i.e., over all these divinitiesthe0neSupreme Lord who presided, that 0ne Supreme Lord of peace, power and immortal bliss, we worship and serve with homage and havi. 
585 :Which lord divine do we worship with homage of havi? The golden seed of the universe, before the state of its emergence into objective form, lay in the womb of potential Prakrti. Of that Prakrti, as of theforms of existence later born, the one and only lord was H i ranyagarbha, golden father and mother both, of thi ngs now in existence. That one lord of golden glory who sustained the potential universe and who sustains the heavens and earths now, we worship with homage and havi. 
586 :Which lord divine do we worship with homage of havi? A pah, living vitalities of potential Prakrti, mother powers of the universe-in-embryo, moved and animated the embryo and gave birth to the baby universe. Of that embryo and of the universe born, the first and ultimate womb was and is the one lord of golden glory. ThatOne Lord of golden glory and immortal bliss we worship with homage of havi. 
587 :Let these three be off from here: the tiger, the thief and the wolf. Generous rivers flow downwards, generous fruit bearing branches bend down. Let the enemies be forced to bend down and keep low (so that they may be positive). 
588 :Let the wolf go away by far off path. Let the thief and smuggler go away by the farthest path. Let the rope-like snake with fangs go off by far off path. And let the sinner, the robber, go away by the path that is far away. 
589 :O tiger, we disable your eyes, deface your mouth, and wedestroy all yourtwenty nailsof theclaws. 
590 :Of the beasts of deadly teeth, we first crush the tiger, then the thief and the robber, then the snake, then the terrorist and saboteur, then the wolf. 
591 :The thief that comes up today must go, totally disabled and crushed, by a lost (distant) path. Letlndra, the ruler, punish and correct him by the thunderbolt of justice and dispensation. 
592 :The teeth of viol ent beasts are broken, their back too is broken. Let the crocodile be down. Let the sleeping tiger too stay down, allow it not to prowl around. 
593 :Control, discipline, law, this is Sanyama. The opposite of Sanyama is neither control, nor discipline, nor law. Control of violence is the gift of I ndra, power. Freedom isthe gift of Soma, peace. Discipline and law isthe condition of freedom. And such freedom-and-law isthegiftof Atharvan, power and peace at the optimum: 'equilibrium, the tiger at peace under law'. 
594 :We dig you up, potent herb for virility, which Gandharva, the physician, dug up for Varuna, judicious husband who had lost his potency. (The herb is called Vajakarani.) Let the dawn arise, let the sun ascend, let my word and wish be high and effective, let the herb, giver of freshness and energy to people, rise and inspire with O man, when you rise in passion and your body vibrate with heat and desire, then may this herb inspire you with greater energy. 
595 :Best and real essence of the herbs of high potential, O herb, O Indra, controlling spirit of the body system, O physician, vest exuberant energy of virile potency in this man. (The herb probably is Rshabha'.) Best and most efficacious essence of the herbs of high potential, O herb, O Indra, controlling spirit of the body system, in this patient, pray, vest that exuberant energy of potent virility which is worthy of the brave, complementary protector and stimulator as you are, equal of Soma, nature's original. 
596 :Hey Agni, physician giver of fiery energy, O Savita, inspiring warmth of the sun, O divine Sarasvati, perennial stream of knowledge and intellectual energy, O Brahmanaspati, master of Vedic knowledge of health, energise this man's generative system to the maximum degree of power and procreativity like a bow at the optimum stretch. 
597 :I cure and energise your generative system to the optimum like the string on the bow stretched to the maximum degree. Always with eagerness and enthusiasm, advance upon your object and aim as a tiger pounces upon the ruddy antelope. 
598 :W hatever vi ri Ie potencies there be of the horse, the mule, the he-goat, the ram, and of the bull, all those potencies, O controller and reordainer of the body system, vest into the generative system of this man. 
599 :The sun or the moon of a thousand rays of warmth of light and soothing peace rises from the depth of space and retires into silence. With the power and patience of that degree of the Vrshabha herb of thousandfold efficacy which grows on cloudy mountains and relieves people from deep agitation, we help people go to deep sleep and undisturbed rest. 
600 :The wind does not disturb the air with gusts, nor does any one prowl around and break into privacies. O herb, O peace, let the women go to sleep while the alert security people of the ruler watch and move around for peace. 
601 :Whether a woman is to sleep on an open platform or in an out house, or they sleep on the top storey in a comfortable bed, or they are moving and have to sleep in the vehicle itself, or they are women used to perfumes of high quality, we help them all to sleep well. 
602 :I have controlled and closed the agitated eye. I have controlled the breath to peace. I have controlled and withdrawn all parts and senses of the body and mind inward into the deep peace of the night. (That is the state of sleep in peace.) Whoever sits, whoever moves, whoever stays still but looks around, the eyes of all of these we close and hold at peace as the doors of this temple of peace are closed, into the state of void within. 
603 :Let the mother sleep, let the father sleep, let the watch-dog sleep, let the master of the home sleep. Let the faculties related to the soul sleep. Let the people of this land sleep at peace in security all round (in an ideal state of order). 
604 :O sleep, with ideal conditions conducive to peace of rest amd security, let the people sleep until dawn and the day. Let others too sleep at rest until dawn and the day. A nd as I wake up, let me be fresh, unhurt, uninjured, stronger for the new day likelndra, the master spirit. 
605 :w^rrft gsrat ^vi'viImT g^iiW i g Tfrd -g^r: g T^chKKg fcrgg n ^ u The one first and foremost among anti-poison herbs is known as Brahmana (also known as Grshti) which is ten times more effective and ten times more preventive than others against poison. It absorbs the soma energy of living vitality from earth and renders the poison ineffective throwing it out of ten parts of the body. 
606 :A s far as heaven and earth extend, as far as the seven seas roll, that far effective from here have I spoken of the word of remedy against poison. 
607 :O poison, the eagle of mighty beautiful wings eats you up. You neither intoxicate nor rack it, you just become usual food for it. 
608 :Whoever with trained hand and five fingers shoots at you a shaft of poison from his crooked bow, I promise I would take off the shaft of poison by the leaf of Apaskambha (also known as B hi I lataru, Shambara, Lodhra, Rodhra and Kramuka). 
609 :I remove the poison by the leaf and plaster of parnadhi, by A jashrngi broughtfrom far, or by Kulmala also called Padma. 
610 :O poison arrow, let your dart be ineffective, let your poison be ineffective, and let even the bow of the ineffectual tree be ineffective in the hand of the hunter. 
611 :Those who grind the poisonous substances, those who apply, those who shoot and those who release it among the people, all these should be made ineffective, even the sources of poison should be rendered ineffectice. 
612 :O poison and poisonous intoxicant, those who dig and collect you have been made ineffective. O poisonous herb, you have been made ineffective. And that hill and mountain from which this poison has been dug out is made ineffectual. (The point is that there should be no free availability of intoxicant and poisonous substances, they must be strictly under the control of the government for special and specific purposes.) This juice which flows through the herb called 'Vara' or 'varana' is full of nectar for the removal of poison. By this juice I remove the poison from your body system. 
613 :The poison caused by insects and other creatures of the eastern quarter, that caused by insects and other creatures of the northern quarter, and this which is caused by insects and other creatures here on or below the ground becomes ineffectual by the herbal mixture of Karambha and curds with oats. 
614 :Having prepared karambha pudding with sesame and a lot of ghrta to stabilise and strengthen the stomach, if the patient eats the pudding according to appetite, then the poison spreading all over the body would not cause unconsciousness. 
615 :fsr ft ■RT' ^dlclfH iU-lPWcl umajwPh i vt r^n 1 -cj-bWci iiN-H TaiiMiimR-i n x n O intoxicating racking poison, wethrow off your intoxication and makeitfly away as we shoot an arrow, and with Vachas herb according to the right formula stop you from affecting the patient as we stop a boiling pot (by stopping the fire). 
616 :we stop and disperse you with a word. O patient, stand you upright like a tree in its rooted spot. O herb properly dug out, allow not the patient to fall unconscious. 
617 :People buy you with garments, shawls and deer skins. Therefore you are' Prakri', purchasable, in ready form. O herb well dug out, allow not the patient to fall unconscious. (The name of 'Prakri' in dhanvantari, says Pandit Jayadeva Sharma, is 'Prakirya', with five varieties: Karanja, Udakirya, Angaravalli, Guchha- karanja, Rithakaranja.) O men, there are those among you who are not yet mature experts, and those that are beginners. Whatever acts of medication they do, see that they do not maltreat our people, young or old. thus I say to you by way of caution. 
618 :The person of merit, having risen to the prominence worthy of a ruler, brings peace and prosperity among the people and becomes ruler, protector and provider for the people. At his/her anointment and coronation, Yama itself, i.e., law and justice, timeand mutability, collective Destiny, presides as well as provides everything. Being a ruler in this meritorous way, the incumbent should accept and take over the governance of the people and this republic of living beings and the environment. (Note that the ruler is the ruler, protector and provider for the Bhutas, all those, including humans, that are in existence.) O ruler, go forward, do not hesitate, you are blazing illustrious, giver of enlightenment, subduer of adversaries and enemies. Come, take over and be firm, bright as sun, advancethefriendly powers and be exalted by friendly powers. The brilliant and most generous enlightened people exhort you. 
619 :Seated in position, let all the best people attend and exalt you who, vested with glory, refulgent with your essential meritand power, move on with your royal powers and obligations across the dominion. It is truly the glory of the great and generous lord of life that he, of universal form and purpose, stands by all the immortals of existence. (Similarly, it is the power and obligation of the ruler that his presence be felt everywhere and he stand by all the immortal values of life in the dominion. This very divine obligation of the ruler was interpreted as the divine right of the king in history.) A very lion among men, harbinger of profuse showers of prosperity, go forward in royal dignity and regality over all quarters of the great earth. Let all citizens of the land love and welcome you, let all communities dynamic at works of divine value be happy and exuberant, their home overflowing with milk and honey. 
620 :and celebrate Divinity in the skies divinely bless and exalt humanity with milk and honey on earth. With the glory and regality of all those waters I anoint and consecrate you. 
621 :Let divine showers of the milk and honey of glory bless and sanctify you with illustrious royalty. Let the showers of people's profuse praise and exhortation raise you high with earthly grandeur.A nd as you advance the merit and dignity of friendly powers, so may Savita, divine lord of inspiration and creativity, bless you with regal honour and grace. 
622 :Showers of divine grace and human praise replete with love and admiration consecrate and inspire the ruler, regal harbinger of milk and honey and generous streams of water for human fulfilment, so that he may rise and win high glory and good fortune for himself and his people. And just as blessed streams of holy lands do homage to the deep sea, so noble people do homage of consecration and loyalty to the ruler abiding firmly, holding the earth in the midst of the seas This is a hymn in praise of 'anjana', collyrium, literally speaking. B ut all the mantras cannot be properly understood in the literal sense: for example, "it is a good protective for horses and cows" makes no sense. H ence anjana has to be interpreted in an extended sense. 
623 :'Anjana' is a substantive from the root'anj' which means'to make clear, to refine, decorate, beautify, to complete, fulfil'. So 'anjana' is to be interpreted in the sense of something that beautifies the body, refines the mind and elevates the soul: beauty aids, manners and culture, knowledge and spirituality. 
624 :Come Anjana, protective grace of life, beauty of the eye, gift of the clouds and mountain of veteran heights, given by all brilliancies of nature and humanity, beatific perfection at the borders of life's possibilities. 
625 :enhancement and refinement of senses and mind for cultural sensitivity, progressive achievement of daring pioneers, you are the universal distinction of life's nature and nurture for the grace of progressive evolution. 
626 :Anjana, beauty and grace of life, you are the protective fulfilment of life, standing on guard against the mundane ailments of the world. You are the knowledgeable spirit of the beauty and bliss of immortality and freedom. You are the real and ultimate food of the human spirit and the guarding angel against the jaundiced eye, the highest saviour sanative for the soul. 
627 :O saviour beatific, A njana, whoever the person high or low, when you seep into his body, mind and soul part by part, joint by joint, cell by cell, you stop the cancerous consumption and stand as a blazing bulwark the lower demons and the higher vision. 
628 :O vision and love of beauty and grace, A njana, whoever the person that internalizes and holds on to you in faith with courage, malignity and curse approach him not, no black magic, no imprecation or burning hate can affect him, no evil design can ever touch him. (You are the spiritual mark of security on the forehead.) O love of real beauty and faith in divine grace, A njana, knowledge and dedication to truth, protect us against imprecation and evil chant, save us from evil dream and negative ambition, guard us against evil will and action, and save us from heinous sin. Protect us against the evil eyeand the devilish heart. Saveusfrom all this evil and damaging negativity. 
629 :O light of the inner eye, A njana, beatific beauty of divinity, knowing full well and having attained full faith, I pledge: I shall speak the truth, no untruth ever. 
630 :Cows and horses, lands and acquisitions, senses and mind, will and action, education and culture, knowledge and grace, all this is your gift. O Spirit of the U niverse, pray let me live by these and ultimately serve the soul to be what I am for you as yours. 
631 :Three are the negativities against Anjana, enemies of the beauty and grace of life divine: These are: feverish ambition for the material world, depressive delusion of the mind against clairvoyance, and serpentine suppression of the spirit by passion and instinct. O Anjana, your father and protector is the most generous and highest gracious Spirit of the highest possibilities of life, his name being Kakut, master controller of the three modes of Nature: Sattva, clairvoyance of intelligence, Rajas, energy, and Tamas, inertia or matter. This protector and master of the three motherly materials of Prakrti is Tryambakam, fragrant promoter of the real life. 
632 :That'Anjana', collyrium of the real, clairvoyant eye born of the triple master and father beyond the mountains of the moon, Tryambakam, destroys all the sufferings of the body, mind and soul and eliminates all the evil distractors of the life divine. 
633 :O vision of clairvoyance, A njana, whether you areTraikakuda, i.e., born of the Triple M aster through the threefold divine vision of knowledge, action and meditation, or, whether you are called Yamuna, i.e., meditative guide through the social and personal ethics of Yama and N iyama, both ways your names are noble. By both of these, pray, protect and guide us through life to the beauty and grace of life divine. 
634 :Born of wind, lightning and light of the sun, across the middle regions, risen from gold, may thefine golden Shankha shell protect us against sin and suffering. 
635 :By Shankha which arises from the sea in advance of the brilliant ones in quality, we destroy lifeconsuming evil elements of nature in the body system. 
636 :By Shankha we challenge and destroy digestive ailments, weakness of mind and memory, and all other life-consuming weaknesses of health. May Shankha which is a universal golden remedy of ill health save us from sin and suffering. 
637 :A risen in the light of the solar region, born of the deep sea, collected from rivers and the seas, may the Shankha shell, of jewel value and golden quality, be the life-saving ark for us to cross the ocean-floods of life. 
638 :Just as the sun appears from the depth of the clouds of darkness, so the Shankha is born of the sea. May the Shankha so born and collected with its action and efficacy protect us against the blazing heat and onslaughts of the violence of natural and human forces. 
639 :Of the golden gifts of nature you are the one unique born with the soothing golden beauty of Soma, the moon. You are the glorious hero of the chariot and shine blazing in the quiver. Pray give us a long life of good health and joyous fulfilment. 
640 :The Shankha is the golden body bone of pearl with divine elements of the forces of nature, and with its own body and soul it moves around in waters of the seas and rivers. That Shankha of elemental efficacies, O man, I bind on you for good health, lustrous courage, strength of body and mind, and a long life of full hundred years and more. May this golden gift of nature's own efficacies protect and promote you against sin and suffering. 
641 :In ordinary language, 'anadvan' means the bull that draws the cart. I n this hymn anadvan is a metaphor forthesustainer, burden bearer, of the dynamic universe. 
642 :The cosmic burden bearer of the universe holds and sustains the earth, the heaven and the vast intervening space. He bears all the extensive six quarters of space and indeed it is Anadvan, the burden-bearer, who pervades the entire worlds of the universe in existence, and it is he who holds and sustains them. 
643 :after all the living beings of the world. He traverses, comprehends and orders the three modes and dimensions of the universe of thought, energy and matter. Creating, sustaining and dispensing the context of cause and effect of natural dynamics across three dimensions of time he observes and ordains the laws and disciplines of all the divine forces of nature and humanity. 
644 :Indra, pervasive presence manifest among humanity vibrates omnipresent as the light and heat of the sun, refulgent and illuminant. The man blest with noble progeny, knowing Indra as such, univolved in material pleasures, would not wander around far away from the divine presence. 
645 :A nadvan, the burden bearer I ndra, showers this soul with the milk of life's joy in the land of bliss and, purifying and sanctifying it straight, without any mediation, gives it fulfilment. The cloud is the lord's shower of grace, the winds are treasures of favours, yajna is the milk and divine nectar, and dakshina is the divine gift. 
646 :The master institutor and performer of yajna governs it not, nor does he govern its gifts. Neither yajna, nor giver, nor receiver governs it. O sages speak to us of the refulgent illuminant lord, ruler, sustainer and maker of the universe, how great is he, the lord of four phases in terms of our experience and possibilities of Being. 
647 :B y whose grace noble sages arose to the regions of bliss, having given up their material body, and attained to the centre of the nectar of immortality, by the same lord's grace, let us too, seekers of honour and bliss, rise to the same regions of piety and bliss through meditative practice and discipline of the lord self- refulgent and all illuminant. 
648 :Indra, lord omnipotent, in terms of existential form isAgni, light and fire, in terms of sustenance he is Prajapati, father of his children, Parameshthi, lord supreme transcendant, and Virat, infinite and self- refulgent. He pervades in universal humanity, he pervades in universal vital energy, he pervades in life sustaining energies of nature, he strengthens and expands existence, and he bears and sustains the world of his creation. 
649 :This is the centre of this burden bearer wherein this burden of the universe is collected and concentrated. A s much is the part of it gone by as is the part coming up front, both the past and the future concentrated in the centre poi nt. (T hi s i s the mystery as w el I as the real i ty of the infinite burden bearer and, consequentially, of the burden.) O ne who knows the seven showers of the grace of this eternal imperishable burden bearer, he realises and attains both the world of existence and the people that inhabit it. This the seven sages too know and express. 
650 :(These seven sages age: the soul, clear intelligence, ahankara or l-sense, mind, prana, senses of perception, and senses of volition.) Covering the field with feet and legs, overcoming exhaustion, producing food and delicious drink with sweat and hard work, the farmer and the burden bearer move on together. (So do the human being and the master burden bearer move together in the world of existence. The master burden bearer creates the world context, the field of work, while the human being, farmer, sows the seed of karma and reaps the harvest which is the fruit of his karma. One who knows this complete scenario of existence realises both this world and the ultimate all-comprehensive reality. And that knowledge and realisation is freedom.) These twelve are the nights of darkness which, they say, are to be dedi cated to the di sci pi i ne of P raj apati (for the sake of his children). Therein and thereby one who knows Brahma, Prajapati and his knowledge of Veda at the closest, observes and attains to Prajapati's discipline of Dharma and purpose of living. 
651 :(Twelve kinds of ignorance have been described as ignorance, confusion or negation about: Cosmic soul, individual soul, intelligence, ego, mind, prana, senses of perception, objects of perception, senses of volition, objects of volition, the individual body, the cosmic body. Reference may also be made to twelve-day Vedic ceremonies for knowledge and piety.) I receive the showers of divinity in the morning, I receive the showers in the evening, I receive them at mid-day. The showers of the presence that come to me, we know, are revelations of the eternal, they are imperishable. 
652 :You are Rohini, the healer, healer of the broken bone. Growing, unobstructive, A rundhati, clearer of the blockade, pray heal this wound and let the bone grow normally. 
653 :Whatever in your body is injured, whatever is torn and broken and crushed, may the universal healer with this efficacious herb join, every part with another and heal to full growth. 
654 :Let your marrow join with marrow and grow, let your joint of spine join with the joint, let the torn flesh be healed, join with the bone and grow. 
655 :ttstt m sjfcmt ^4'uu mf i mrtm fr^r mm mPu 1 fr^r u >s u Let the marrow join and grow with marrow, let your skin join with the skin and grow, let the blood and bonejoin and grow, and lettheflesh grow with theflesh. 
656 :Let the hair be pi anted w i th the hai r, I et the skin be joined with the skin, let the blood heal the bone and let it grow, let the broken bone be joined with the bone. 
657 :A rise and stand, O patient, move up, go fast like a chariot of strong wheels, strong felly and strong nave, stand, stand and stay, stand firm and stay up. 
658 :If the wound is caused by a large knife, or a stone-shot has hit you, let the surgeon join, part with part as an expert technician repairs and rejoins the parts of a chariot. 
659 :O Devas, noble, brilliant and generous powers and people, raise the fallen, raise them higher again and again. And, O devas, O lovers of divinity, if they do evil and commit sin, even then save them, give them life again, redeem them. 
660 :Two winds these are that blow: One that blows from nature's sea and the river of energy, the other blows far off and away. One is prana that blows in to the lungs, the heart and the blood stream. There i s the other, apana, that blows out. The one, prana, breathes in energy, freshness, enthusiasm and expertise. The other, apana, blows out whatever is impure and polluted. 
661 :and strengthens the body system with good health. O apana, blow out and throw away what is impure and polluted. O wind, you are the universal sanative, destroyer of ill-health, and you blow as messenger of the divinities, harbinger of good health and the joy of living. 
662 :O Devas, divinities of nature and humanity, save this life, this humanity. O energies of the winds, energise and save this life of humanity. O human and natural forms and forces of the world, save and strengthen this life so that it may become free from sin and violence. 
663 :O man, I come to you with the means and message of peace and good health and freedom from violence and disease. I bear and bring for you the lustre of good health, passion for life and expertise to live and work. I inspire and energise you and throw out consumptive and cancerous negativities from your health system. 
664 :This my hand is powerful, it commands good fortune and generous felicity. Indeed, this hand of mine grows even more and morefelicitous and generous with its charity and good fortune. This hand is really a saviour, a universal sanative, it is really soothing and saving with the healing touch. 
665 :With both hands of tenfold soft caress of fingers, with the tongue that brings forth words of love and intention inspiring you to rise and move forward, with hands that emanate freedom from ailment and disease, with these we give you the healing touch of health and well being. 
666 :Aja, the unborn human soul, rose into the state of being by the will and passion of Agni, light eternal beyond the state of Being and Becoming. As it arose, it first saw thejanita, light eternal, the generator that brought it into being. By the same divine presence and will the divinities of nature and sagely nobilities of humanity first attained to their divine character. M en of pure mind and spirit too rise to their heights of possibility by the same light of divinity. 
667 :By the light and grace of Agni, go forward and rise to the state of bliss, bearing in hands yajnic homage for the fire and, having reached on top of the regions of light and bliss by the divinities, attain to the state of liberation. 
668 :the sky, from the sky I rise to the regions of light, from the top of heavenly joy of the regions of light I have risen to the light and bliss of Divinity. (This mantra describes the yogi's ascent from the heights of attainment on earth, through the skies and solar regions to the state of Turiya, absolute bliss in the K aivalya state of pure Being. The state of the ascent of humanity to Divinity, or alternatively, the descent of Divinity to humanity is described in Rgveda 8, 44, 23.) Sagely men of knowledge and experiential attainment, who practice and expand at their individual level the yajna of communion between their soul and the cosmic soul, and rise from the earth through sky and the solar regions on way to the bliss of Divinity, accept nothing for a compromise but only the attainment of union with the Divine. 
669 :Come Agni, be with us, first, last and eternal, first of the divinities, light of divines such as the sun, and light of the spirit of humanity. May the yajamanas, loving and joining in company with veteran sages and scholars, rise to divine bliss. May there be good and all round well being with them. 
670 :With the homage of milk and ghrta in the sacred fire, I honour, celebrate and serve the Aja, unborn, eternal, infinite Divine Spirit of golden glory. May we, by the service and the light and grace of Agni, rising to the regions of bliss, reach the presence of Divinity, the state of infinite happiness. 
671 :H old the panchaudana, havi prepared from five grains and milk, curd, ghrta, rock sugar and honey, in a ladle with five fingers of the hand, raise it to offer into the sacred fire. KeeptheAja's, unborn soul's, head, i.e., intelligence in the east direction, the right part in the southern direction. (Aja here does not mean a goat, it means 'the man in the posture of meditation and prayer.' 'Panchandana' havi is love, faith, knowledge, prayer and communion and all other experience gathered through five senses, mind and intelligence. The mantra means the yajna of self-surrender to Divinity). 
672 :Keep theAja'sback part in the western direction, keep the left part in the northern direction, keep the spine vertically straight in the upper direction, keep the lower part firm on the seat on ground, and keep the middle part in the middle position. (This is obviously a description of the body posture when theyajamana sits on the vedi or the yogi sits in proper posture for meditation. The word 'dhruvayam' is echoed in Patanjali's description of the meditation posture in Yoga Sutras, 2, 46 where he says that the yogi's seat should be "firm and comfortable: sthira sukham asanam." human soul, complete in all aspects of human virtue, perfected and raised to universal character in the existential medium of personality, enfold it in the infinite grace of Divinity. O man, completed, perfected, universalised, and now consecrated with divine grace, rise from the earth to the highest state of divine bliss and with all four stages of ascension from existence to essence, sojourn in perfect freedom over all directions of eternal time and space. 
673 :Note: This sukta is a song of the immortal human soul's ascension from the mortal state of existence to its immortal state of essence abiding in the perfect freedom of M oksha through eight parts (angas) of yoga and four parts of Dharma (Dharma, Artha, Kama and M oksha). 'Aja chatushpat' of verse 9 does not mean 'four-footed goat', it means the immortal human soul, yoga-practising and self-realising through all four states of waking, dreaming, sleeping and meditating, rising to the turiya state (M andukyopanished, 2-7 and 8-12). 
674 :Let clusters of dense vapour in the quarters of the firmament rush in together. Let clouds driven by winds fly on together. Let overladen showers dense with vapour of the thundering clouds of bursting sky rain down and fill the earth to the full. 
675 :Let mighty generous clouds be favourable to us and and share their delicious showers of vitality with herbs and trees. Let showers of rain arouse and exalt the earth. Let herbs of immense variety sprout and grow in all different ways. 
676 :O lord, show usthe rumbling clouds in theskies. Let multitudes of clouds rush on and overwhelm the firmament. Let showers of rain gladden and exalt the earth. Let plants and trees of all kinds sprout and grow. 
677 :Let currents of wind, O cloud of rain, celebrate you in song all round. May showers of rain falling and blessing the earth according to the needs of the season oblige us. 
678 :O winds, stir the vapours of water from the sea evaporated by the heat of the sun and raise them to the sky. Let the profuse showers of rain from the rumbling clouds of the roaring sky fall and fill the earth to the full. 
679 :Thunder and roar, O cloud, shake the flood of the firmament into showers, and bless the earth with life giving rain. Let the showers released by you fall and flow profusely, and let the hopeful farmer go home happy. 
680 :Let the mighty bounteous showers save you from drought and promote you to prosperity. Let the clouds impelled and propelled by the winds rain down on earth in showers according to the needs of the season. 
681 :Let lightnings flash all round in all directions. Let winds blow in all directions from all directions. Let clouds moved by winds shower in accord with the earth. 
682 :O children of the earth, let waters, lightning and thunder, cloud and showers, and the great bounteous floods of water, rains, rivers and seas protect and promote you to prosperity. May the clouds moved by winds promote the produce of the earth. 
683 :May Agni, J ataveda, all pervasive vitality of life, one with the form and spirit of waters and life forms, which is over all protector and promoter of the life and efficacy of herbs, bless us with nectar showers of water from over the heavens and the firmament as the very breath and energy of I ife for al I people and other forms of life. 
684 :Prajapati, lord of his people, solar sustainer of life, raising vapours of water from the rolling oceans, forms and breaks the spatial oceans of vapours. B y this, may the living vitality of the generous abundant cloud increase, and by this very augmentation, further, may the showers of rain by the catalytic force of lightning come down and bless the earth. 
685 :The cloud of waters and showers, giver of life energy, is our protector and promoter. O Varuna, dear cloud, release the showers of rain down and let the streams and pools of water come to life, and then let the colourful frogs croak with joy in the rippling pools and flowing streams in celebration of the earth. 
686 :Frogs are celebrants of divinity: observing the cycle of nature's seasons, lying in hybernation for a year, they sing and celebrate life, singing in their natural language inspired by the cloud and showers of rain. 
687 :O froggy, O little baby froggy, sing and celebrate. Call on the rain, extend your four legs in joy and swim freely in the flood. 
688 :O hybernating froggy, O silent little one, enjoy and have fun in the rain. O seniors, guardians of the people, try to have the knowledge and favour of the O lord, O people, raise the cloud, treasure bearer of rain. Bring rain on the earth. Let the sky flash with thunder and lightning for rain. Let the wind blow favourable for rain. Extend and develop yajna for rain. Let the herbs, sprouted, grown and extended for yajna and rain be great sources of joy and well being. 
689 :Mighty and infinitely great isthe ruling lord and master of these worlds of the universe who watches everything as if at the closest, directly, and, expanding these all, alert and ever awake, knows, watches and assesses the entire universe and its working. This, the brilliant divine sages know well. 
690 :W ho does not move and stands still, who moves, who deceives, who acts under disguise or openly or crookedly, whatever two people in consult talk and decide together, all these the third, the witness, the allruling Varuna, lord of universal judgement, dispensation and retribution, knows, ever watchful. 
691 :And this earth is the dominion of the ruler Varuna, and so is that vast heaven at the far end, and both the oceans of earth and space are Varuna's, they all exist in him, and so does he pervade and is hidden in the greatest and in the smallest of waters. 
692 :And he who thinks he might possibly stride beyond the far off heavens of light cannot get away free from the dominion of the ruler Varuna. The watchful sentinels of this lord of light and the heavens are ever on the move, watching, thousand eyed, they watch even beyond the world of existence. They watch intensely, they miss nothing. 
693 :All that, the ruler Varuna watches closely, whatever is in heaven and earth and beyond. Even people's wink of the eye every moment throughout life is watched, counted and assessed by him as every cast and move of the dice is perceived by the player. (May be he is a player. H e has cast the die and watches. We are the dice. He casts us according to our Karma, but we move according to our will, still within the rules of his game.) O Varuna, those threefold laws of existence seven by seven, which ever abide, ever active, ever shining, never sparing, may they all bind or split the personality of the man who speaks untruth, and may they all release and recreate the man who speaks the truth. 
694 :O Varuna, all presiding, all watching ruler, with a hundred bonds of your laws bind and restrain this liar. Let him not escape the bonds of your law. Let this unfortunate man, his inner personality split into shreds, self-tortured, lie loose like a broken vessel. 
695 :Varuna that is common and equal for all, yet different and specific for every one among all, Varuna that is good and equal for all places, Varuna that is different and specific for ail places, that Varuna is good to the divinely sages as well as to ordinary human beings. 
696 :By all these bonds of the law of Nature I bind you, son of your mother and scion of your family line, O Apamarga, best of herbal sanatives, in order to win our medical objective wetakeyou up for medical treatment and reinforce you to a thousandfold higher efficacy as a cure for all diseases. 
697 :I take up and reinforce the truly conquering, cursed disease reverting, successfully challenging and persistently acting herb in which I collect and concentrate the pow er and eff i cacy of al I herbs i n general so that it may give us success in fighting against all diseases. 
698 :malignity, whatever has planted itself as a fast growing killer disease, whatever has seized life's regenerative force to consume the vitality of life and arrest the renewal, may all that cancerous curse itself consume its own germination and further growth to cause its own end. 
699 :Whatever damage the cancerous causes do in the constipated intestines, whatever they do in the veins and arteries, whatever damage they do in the formative flesh, by whatever ways and causes they do so, by that very process reversed, destroy the causes of the disease. 
700 :Bad dreams and loss of sleep, depression, hyper tension and schizophrenia, debility, loss of lustre, and all cursed and superstitious diseases concerned with loss of honour and image and loss of reputation, we eliminate from us. (Durnaman and Durvach are names of piles.) O Apamarga, destroyer of all want of health and causes of death and disease, with your power and efficacy we ward off and cleanse loss of appetite, diseases concerned with thirst, diseases of the weakness and loss of perceptive senses and dementia, sterility and infertility and all other ailments of body and mind. 
701 :O A pamarga, panacea for health and happiness, with your versatile power and efficacy we eliminate from our life and society all diseases that cause death by thirst or loss of thirst, by hunger or loss of hunger, and all mental diseases caused by addiction such as gambling, alcohol or the thrill of chance and unknown possibility and expectation. 
702 :Of all the medicines, Apamarga is the one all conquering against disease. O patient, with that we cure and eliminate the chronic disease from you so that you live and enjoy life healthy, happy and free from disease. 
703 :Light is naturally one with the sun. Night is naturally close with the day, (the one implies the other). Similarly, I naturally follow the truth for peace, protection and security (because truth and peace with security and protection go together). And when you equate truth and peace both in action, all counterfeits become void of meaning and value. This is the ethics of professionalism. 
704 :If a clever man does an evil act and robs the house of an ignorant, innocent, trustful man, O devas, the evil act would recoil on the doer just like a suckling calf going back to the mother cow. (This is a warning to a clever professional who cheats innocent, ignorant people while they trust him. Evil must return to its source.) H aving pianned an evi I act at home, if a person hurts and kills another person with that, then, when that evil act is accomplished and ignited, imumerable stones would burst forth and destroy the evil doer. 
705 :O ruler of a thousand powers, protector and keeper of a thousand homes, let the old and young sleep at peace. Put the ogres and saboteurs to sleep. Pay the evil doer in his own coin. Let the lover meet his love. 
706 :Thus by this curative and policy of peace I cleanse al I deeds and correct al I evi I s that they do i n the field, among the cows or among the people, and this I do for you all. 
707 :He that does the mischief, or tries but fails to accomplish, burns his own fingers or breaks his own feet. In a way, he does good to us, awakens us, but, after all, this is a torture for himself, he is a torture unto himself. 
708 :Apamarga, real panacea, is that which cleanses and cures us of all physical disease and mental malignity, whether it is individual or social, inherited, contacted or acquired. Itisthatwhich removes all that is negative, destructive and depressive and causes self-deprivation and social debility. 
709 :O Apamarga, personal and social panacea, having cleansed out all violence and negativity, all depression, deprivation and poverty by your power and efficacy, we clean up the totality of life and restore itto purity, good health, happiness and advancement. 
710 :Apamarga, as you are destroyer of deadly and dread diseases and also of the dearest dearly related addictions, pray destroy all violent negativities and their after effects, uproot them like the weeds of the rainy season. 
711 :Created and composed by theBrahmana, scholar of science and Veda, and approved by the wise Councillor, you go forward shining and blazing like a victorious army. O Oshadhi, wherever you reach and act, fear stays no more. 
712 :of all medications, shining and illuminating like light itself. You are the saviour, preserver and protector of the good and pure with maturity, and destroyer of the violent and the killers. 
713 :O Apamarga, divine energy for universal cleansing, when in the early stages of natural evolution, the positive and brilliant creative forces of nature struggle with negativities and resistance and they overcome the dark forces, then you, O crown of herbs, come into being on earth by the name Apamarga, the cleanser, pioneer and leader on way to progress. 
714 :O Apamarga, hundred branched destroyer of disease, it is N ature's force of survival and victory over negative forces in the evolutionary circuit that is your generator. So turn to those forces which seek to subdue and enslave us and destroy them in their natural course. 
715 :Whatever is false, untrue and negative born of the earth, even if it grows and rises to the skies, ultimately returns to its root cause, torturing its own creator and perpetrator. 
716 :You are the giver of the fruit of action: direct for the positive, indirect and reverse for the negative. Pray revert all negativities and enmities directed against me, and revert all deadly weapons away from me. 
717 :Promote me all over by a hundredfold vigour and vitality. Protect me all round by thosandfold forces against all danger and debility. O chief of herbs and san ati ves, m ay m i g hty I n d ra, the o m ni potence of N atu re, bless you with lustrous vigour and efficacy. 
718 :M atrnama is the name of a herb. Satavalekara has, in his note on this sukta, given names of three matrnama herbs which protect and promote good eyesight. And eye sight here extends beyond the physical to the divine vision. The three herbs are: Akhukarani, M ahashravanika and Ghrtakumari. 
719 :O vision divine, by virtue of your gift, man sees, sees directly, sees everything specifically, sees far far and wide, sees all round. Man sees the heavens, the middle regions, the earth, man sees ail. 
720 :O divine herb, divine light of the eye, by virtue of your gift, let me see all things in existence: three regions of light, three earths, three skies and into these six directions one by one. 
721 :O vision divine, you are indeed the pupil of the eye of that celestial Sojourner of light,, the Sun. You are all-watchful divinity, who have descended from heaven to ride this earthly chariot like a way-wearied bride on way to the lover's home. 
722 :That vision, the lord of thousand divine eyes has placed in me, this herb in my right hand for a symbol and efficacy. By that intensified vision. I see all, well and equally, whether one is rich or poor, high or low, master or servant. 
723 :O lord of a thousand divine eyes, show the real forms of things. Do not hide yourself either, reveal yourself to my vision, and help me see into the evil realities of things in existence. 
724 :O herb, O light and vision of divine efficacy, show me the covert damagers of life, show me the demonic devourers of life and vitality. Show me those cancerous negativities that eat up the blood. For this O light of divine vision, you are the super-eye of the realised yogi. You are the fourfold vision of the sagely seer's consciousness. Like the sun travelling in space, reveal, and allow not the cancerous evils to conceal themselves and escape the detective eye. 
725 :With the eye of divine vision, I have caught out the damagers of life from their den and restrained the demonic devourers from sucking life blood. Thereby now I see all whether high or low, I see them all in their human reality. 
726 :Whoflies through the middle regions, who rises to the regions of light and feels he would cross, who thinks he has mastered the earth, such devilish blood suckers, O vision divine, pray expose. 
727 :Let the cows come as rays of the sun. Let them sit and rest in the stalls, be happy and comfortable. They bring happiness and good fortune. May they be fertile, rich with progeny, abundant rich and various by growing, yielding plenty of milk for the health and prosperity of the nation, and thereby let them be harbingers of light as morning dawns. 
728 :Indra, the ruler, gives protection and maintenance for the man dedicated to yajna, divine celebration, social service and education for a purpose and self-fulfilment. This way too he does not deplete his wealth and knowledge but maintains it. He constantly adds to the wealth of the nation in every region of the land, maintaining the devotees of learning for society and divinity, without taking anything from them materially. 
729 :Knowledge, fruits of yajna, generosity, patronage of learning and culture, these are holy cows. Like light rays they do not perish, nor deplete, nor fade away. Thief steals them not, no enemy can afflict them, nor can anyone injure or insult them. The master of these cows, lights and radiations, with which and for which he serves the di vi niti es, the I earned and the wi se, creates, gives and adds to the beauty of life and he too lives, lasts and constantly rises with them. 
730 :Neither a vociferous brute raising clouds of dust I i kea war horse attai ns to these rays of I ight and culture, nor do these raidations penetrate the thick head of a cruel butcher insulated against sensitivity and enlightenment. These cows of holy light and refinement roam freely around the open pastures of the generous man of yajna and social service, a boundless world of freedom, fearlessness and non-violence. 
731 :May Bhaga, lord of wealth and good fortune, give me cows. May Indra, lord of power and majesty, develop cows for me. May Bhaksha, lord of primal food, energy and joy of life give me cows for soma. O people, O lord of power and glory, Indra, I love ail that cows stand for: mothers of food and energy, sources of sweetness, light and culture, masters of knowledge and wisdom, honour and excellence. I love all that with my heart and mind: the beauty, the glory, the ecstasy! O cows, mother spirits of the nation's body, mind and soul, give health and vigour to the weak, turn the ugly to beauty and grace. O people, make the home overflow with peace, prosperity and the bliss of good fortune. You command noble speech and your life and work is praised in the assemblies of the wise. 
732 :O fertile and abundant cows blestwith progeny, feeding on fine green grass and drinking pure water from clear pools, may no thief, no sinner, ever rule over you, may no strike of the cruel butcher ever slaughter you. 
733 :O lord of majesty and power, Indra, exalt this rulerfor our sake, makehim unique, braveand generous among the people. Weaken all his adversaries disposed to enmity. Subject those to the ruling order who boast and proclaim: 'I am the greatest of the great'. Exalt the one ruling order. 
734 :Indra, ruling spirit of the nation, support him among the citizens, among the warriors and among the farmers. Do not support him who is his enemy, without all supportfrom him. Let him be the highest embodiment of the ruling orders. Subject all opposition, adversaries and enemies to the order of governance. 
735 :Let him be the master, protector, promoter and controller of the wealth and resources of the nation. Let him be the ruler of the people over all professional communities. Let him thus be the ruler. Indra, lord of omnipotence and glory of majesty, vest him with great virtues of dignity, power and lustre.And lethisenemies be reduced to the lack-lustre status of negative performers down to zero. 
736 :O heaven and earth, O brilliant sages and scholars, O children of the earth, create and provide ample wealth and beauty of culture and majesty for the order like two fertile cows yielding profuse milk and ghrta for yajna. Let this ruler be dear to Indra, lord omnipotent, and to the sovereign social order, and let him be a lover of cows, herbs and trees and the animals in general. 
737 :For your order of governance, I join you with the lord of supreme power and vision by whose grace men always win their goal and never lose, and who would raise you to the highest position among people, thehighest officeamong rulers, and the highest wisdom among men on earth. 
738 :O ruler, you are the higher, your equal adversaries and your enemies, one and all, they are lower, much below you. Sole one, unique and mighty, friend and favourite of Indra, Lord Almighty, you are the conqueror of those engaged in enmity. Bring in and provide for thefood, maintenance and peace and security of the people, all of them, friends and foes alike. 
739 :Icon of the regal lion as ruler of the people, rule and have taxes from the people but spend and consume the money like yajnic fire. Icon of the ferocious tiger, fight out all the enemies, sole one, unique and mighty, friend and favourite of I ndra, conqueror of enemies, take away ail their powers and privileges which are the fuel of their enmity. (This idea of the expenditure of income is clearly expressed in Rgveda 6, 59, 3 through the metaphor of yajna: National income by taxes is havi, expenditure is oblation, and the return is fragrance. The Vedic idea of political and administrative management of national economy is: M aximum production from the minimum investment.) I study, honour and meditate on Agni, first, eternal, omniscient lord of all the five orders of humanity, pervasive in all people at all places, whom people light and serve in many ways. May omnipresent Agni save and deliver us from all sin and distress, we pray. 
740 :O Jataveda, all knowing, all pervasive power and presence, as you carry the input of yajnic havi, carry itto thedivinities, and accomplish theform and function of yajna with full knowledge, so bring us, too, noble knowledge and wisdom and save us from sin and distress. 
741 :Day by day, I honour and worship Agni, appropriate and adorable power in every act and programme, most powerful carrier of every thing to its proper end, destroyer of negative forces, growing by oblations of ghrta and exalting the yajna further. May that dynamic power and presence save us from sin and distress. 
742 :We invoke and worship Agni, divinely manifested in every thing born in existence, infinite presence and universal friend of mankind and carrier of our homageto thedivinities. May that dynamic power save us from sin and distress. 
743 :May Agni, divine friendly power by which visionary sages light up their power of the mind and spi rit, by w hi ch the uncanny forces of the evi I are thrown off, and by which Indra, the mighty soul, wins over the stinginess, fear and negativities of small minds and social forces, that Agni, we pray, may save us from sin and distress. 
744 :Agni by which the devas, divine souls, achieve the nectar of immortality, by which the vital vibrations of nature make the herb full of honey sweets, and by which the Devas rise to eternal joy and bring the heaven upon earth, may that Agni bring usthelightand ecstasy against sin and darkness. 
745 :Agni in whose sole and absolute dominion exists all that shines expansive and radiating, all that is born, and the yet unborn that is to be born in future time, that Agni I praise and worship. Seeking, forlorn, suppliant, I invoke and pray that Agni may save us from sin and distress and exalt us to light and freedom. 
746 :We think, investigate and reflect upon Indra, omnipotent energy of the lord of nature. We always, in a sustained manner, meditate upon the nature and presence of Indra, lord omnipotent of the universe and destroyer of demonic evil, darkness and ignorance. The words of adoration have now come to me in honour of the lord who listens and responds to the call of the generous man of charity and noble action. May Indra save us from sin and distress. 
747 :We meditate upon I ndra, giver of final beatitude, lord of mightiest arms over the blazing brave, who strengthens heroic warriors and shatters the strength of demonic destroyers. He sets the running floods aflow, controls the rolling oceans, shines the stars and spins the planets, radiates the rays of light and blesses the holy cows. May that lord of power and bliss save us from sin and distress. 
748 :H e that gives fulfilment to industrious people, brings showers of generosity, illuminates the paths of bliss, for whom yajnic celebrants sing songs of exaltation, whose most ecstatic creative yajna of love and non-violence is conducted by seven priests (i.e., five elements of nature, human soul and Ratm, the cosmic law), may he save us from sin and distress. 
749 :Whose law and authority veteran sages honour and cloud showers obey, for whom yajnic flags are hoisted in reverence to his beatific gift of heavenly light, for whom the purest soma of natural ecstasy to the accompaniment of Vedic hymns is offered, may thatlord I ndra save us from sin and distress. 
750 :Whose love connoisseurs of soma ecstasy cherish, whom, on the attainment of enlightenment, devotees invoke as the lord giver of target fulfilment, in whom light of the sun finds its centre abode and lustrous might, its original source, may thatlord of soma, light and power save us from sin and distress. 
751 :W ho f i rst arose for the act of creation and natural evolution, whose omnipotence is known as the sole divine power, and whose thunder force self-raised strikes the resistent powers with awe, that lord Who, lord of absolute power and control, guides the forces of natural dynamics to the goal, who creates the two complementarities of nature's vitality for growth, that Indra, I, self-surrendered, self-control led, divinely protected, invoke and adore and pray the lord may save us from sin and distress. 
752 :We contemplate the holy acts and attributes of Vayu, divine cosmic energy, and Savita, refulgentdivine creative inspirer, who enter, preserve and promote the living world of nature, who sustain and govern the dynamics of the entire universe. May thetwo, Vayu and Savita, save us from evil, want and affliction. 
753 :The earthly extensions of nature's evolution are sustained and comprehended by Vayu and Savita. By them the particles of matter and vapours of water are sustained and controlled in the middle sphere. No one can reach and comprehend the high degree of the dynamics of the two. May they save us from evil, want and affliction. 
754 :O Vayu, all people observe and live in the discipline of your pranic law and sustenance. O Savita of wondrous light, when you rise people feel inspired and engage in their daily tasks. You both, Vayu and Savita, preserve, sustain and promote the worlds of existence. May the two save us from sin, evil and affliction. 
755 :May Vayu and Savita drive away evil deeds, destructive forces and afflictive elements from here. Together, with pranic energy, strength of vital warmth of nourishment and inspiration for advancement, you evolve and create new possibilities of life's progress. 
756 :May Savita and Vayu both create, bear and bring me cherished and auspicious wealth, honour and excellence, nourishment and good health, strong and handsome body, self-confidence and expertise for action, freedom from weakness and disease, and lustre of life, and bless me here. May both of them save us from sin, affliction and deprivation. 
757 :Savita and Vayu, pray give us wisdom for protection and progress, pleasure, splendour and bliss for the soul, and progressive and abundant beauty, decency and grace of life. Pray save us from want, May our highest ambitions and prayers reach and be established in the presence and protection of both divine Vayu and divine Savita. I invoke and adore both divine creator Savita, theinspirer, and divine Vayu, the energiser, and pray they may save us from sin and affliction, indifference and deprivation. 
758 :I reflect upon heaven and earth, father and mother potentials of Supreme lord divine, which extend expansive far beyond measures of distance. Both, together, are givers of life and sustenance, being, indeed, the mainstay of the Vasus, abodes and protectors of life's existence. May they save us from sin and evil. 
759 :Both heaven and earth are indeed the mainstay of theVasus, abodes of lifesustainers. They are ancient and exalted, divinely generous, blissful givers of good fortune and expansive beyond all measure. May both heaven and earth be gracious to me and save us from evil and affliction. 
760 :Unafflictive both, given to relentless law of divinity, heaven and earth I invoke, both expansive wide and high, measureless deep, adorable celebrities for poets. May heaven and earth be gracious to me and save us from sin and suffering. 
761 :You, O heaven and earth, who bear the nectar sweets of life's pleasure and sustenance, who bear the fragrant havisfor our yajna, who bear streams and rivers, and who bear and sustain humanity, pray be kind and gracious to me and save us from sin and deprivation. 
762 :You, O heaven and earth, who bear and sustain the cows, herbs and trees, who bear and sustain all worlds of existence in your wide expanse, pray be kind and gracious to me and save us from sin and starvation. 
763 :You, O heaven and earth, who replete the world with food and drink and gratify living beings, without whom no one can possibly do anything, pray be kind and gracious to me and save us from sin and frustration. 
764 :This is that now afflicts me, done for whatever reason, human or destined, not divine, O heaven and earth, I invoke you and to you I pray, helpless but not alienated and unprotected, be kind and gracious to me and save us from sin and sufferance. 
765 :I reflect and meditate upon the M aruts, vibrant forces of nature's dynamics of evolution inspiring humanity, pioneering scholars and thinkers, and refreshing pranic energies: may they energise me, speak their message to me, preserve, protect and promote this energy and enthusiasm of life to win further victories in our struggle for higher living. Fast like war horses are they, innately controlled progressive powers, leading to fresh achievement, I invoke them for peace, progress and security. May they save us from sin and dangerous over-enthusiasm. 
766 :Children of nature, sun and sky are they who always increase and extend the inexhaustible waters from the cloud down to the sea and infuse the herbs with the sap of life. I keep them ever before my mind and meditate. May they save us from sin and distress so that we may never try to over-reach and fall instead of rising. 
767 :Poetic powers and forces of creative vision and self-control who increase, invigorate and intensify the milk of cows, sap of herbs and the speed and impulse of the powers of progress, may the M aruts, we pray, be kind and gracious to us and save us from sin and sufferance. 
768 :M aruts, which raise the vapours from the sea to the sun and release the showers of rain from the sun and sky to the earth, sagely pioneers who sojourn with vision from sea to the sun and bring us showers of knowledge from heaven to earth, M aruts, all who command the waters of life and universally roam around for al I equal I y w ith freedom, may they save us from si n and suffering. 
769 :Those that nurture with the food of life, who refine with the sweetness and light of ghrta, who infuse life with beauty and grace, M aruts who command the strength, sweetness and culture of life with grace and no friction, and shower us with the joy of life, may they save us from sin and suffering. 
770 :O M aruts, if this life as it is is the consequence of the power and potential of maruts, forces of nature, or, O divines, it is so by the will of divinity, then O Vasus, sustainersof life, divine, natural and human, you are competent to shape and reshape it for deliverance, repair and progress onwards. Pray may all save us from sin, sufferance and suffering, and help us recover and advance. 
771 :The creative vision, power and potential of the M aruts, sharp, war-like, patient yet challenging, penetrative and pioneering in the struggle of life, is realised and known. Prayerful, suppliant, weak but not fallen and alienated, I invoke the M aruts, celebrate and call upon them, may they save us from sin, sufferance and distress, and help us march on. 
772 :O divine power of creative evolution, Bhava, and O divine power of involution and annihilation, Sharva, I reflect and meditate on you. You know and possess this world which exists and manifests within your space and law, which you both govern in its entirety, whether it is biped or quadruped. O divine ruling powers, pray save us from sin and suffering in this world of life and death. 
773 :O Bhava and Sharva, who are known as the sharpest shooters of those archers who shoot and kill, under whose control isall thatwhich isnearand all that is far, who both govern the bipeds and the quadrupeds, pray, both of you save us from sin and suffering in this world of life and death. 
774 :Thousand eyed destroyers of sin, darkness and sufferi ng, bl azi ng far-reachers at the farthest any w here, I invoke and call upon you, celebrating and praying I come, save us from sin and suffering in this world of life and death, rule as you do the world of bipeds and quadrupeds. 
775 :You two who together began the multitude of existence long long before, and created the light among mankind, who rule the world of both bipeds and quadrupeds, pray save us from sin and suffering in this Whose fatal strike no one can escape, whether among the brightest or among ordinary people, who govern and control the bipeds and the quadrupeds both, pray save us from sin and suffering in this world of life and death. 
776 :O B hava and Sharva, whoever be an assassin, a destroyer, a killer of the seed and root of life, O wielders of the thunder and power of life and death, blazing divines who conrtol this world of bipeds and quadrupeds, strike your bolt there, pray save us from sin and suffering and from an ignoble death. 
777 :Lustrous Bhava and terrible Sharva, speak and guide us in the battles of life, and strike the fatal bolton him that is selfish, cruel and destructive. I invoke you, celebrate and call upon you, I need help and succour, and pray save us from sin and suffering in this world of life and death. 
778 :I reflect and meditate on you, O M itra and Varuna, life's love and judgement, day and night, sun and wind, prana and apana energisers, powers of governance and justice, observers and augmenters of truth, cooperatives in mind and thought, who drive out mutually conflictive forces, you protect and advance the man of truth in the struggle for better and higher life. Pray save us from sin and distress. 
779 :O M itra and Varuna, equal in mind and thought, who drive out mutually conflictive forces and protect the powers of truth in the human struggle for higher life, who, watching humanity, go to yajna in unison in support of the progress of life, pray save us from sin and suffering. 
780 :O M itra and Varuna, who protect and promote A ngiras, specialist of human vitality and breath energy, Agasti, fighter against sin and disease, Jamadagni, promoter of the hearth f i re and yaj na, A tri, control I er of three kinds of suffering, Kashyapa, man of subtlevision, and Vasishtha who provides settlement for the uprooted, pray save us from sin and suffering. 
781 :O M itra and Varuna, who protect and promote Shyavashva, man of dynamic thought and habit, Vadhryashva, man of sense control, Purumidha, man of prosperity, A tri, man of threefold freedom, Vimada, man free from pride, and Saptavadhri, man of controlled mind and senses, pray save us from sin and suffering. 
782 :O M itra, O Varuna, who protect and promote Bharadvaja, producer and giver of food, Gavishthara, man of good word and protector of the earthly environment, Vishvamitra, universal friend, Kutsa, destroyer of doubt and malignity, Kakshivan, dynamic man of discipline, and Kanva, man of wisdom and subtle vision, pray save us from sin and suffering. 
783 :O M itra and Varuna, who protect and promote Medhatithi, man of controlled intelligence, Trishoka, man thrice brilliant in thought, word and deed, Ushana Kabya, enthusiastic seeker and disciple of the brilliant wise, Gotama, seeker and master of the Word and wisdom of the world, and M udgala, seeker and creator of happiness, pray save us from sin and distress. 
784 :O M itra and Varuna, your chariot, fastened with natural strength and simplicity, goesforward by straight paths of truth and divine law, and arraigns the forces moving by untruth and falsehood. Helpless, in need of succour but not alienated, I invoke and celebrate you and pray save us from sin, deliver us from suffering and distress. 
785 :Note: Vak, the Word, in this sukta is Rashtri Devi, Spiritof the human Nation, Light and LifeDivine, supreme power of the universe which creates and sustains every thing in existence: 'Vachaheedam sarvam krtam' (Shatapatha Brahmana 8, 1, 2, 9). Vak creates and sustains every thing at the individual, organisational and cosmic level. Words such as Rudra, Vasu, Aditya and Vishvedeva, in this sukta, are to be interpreted at all the three levels as different but cooperative and cohesive versions of the same one Supreme power, Vak. Rudra is pranic energy of cosmic vitality of life, Vasu is the sustaining power that settles forms of existence, humans included, and gives them peace and security. Aditya is illuminative power such as the sun at the cosmic level, and teacher intellectual at the social level, Vishvedevas are nature's generous powers and all creative and contributive humans taken together. M itra is the sun, the day and love and warmth of friends. Varuna is the moon, the night, the spirit of judgement and discrimination. Indra is cosmic energy and organisational power. Agni is the fire, enthusiasm and passion for living and leadership, Ashvins are complementarities of the dynamic circuit of energy in the universe and humanity such as positive and negative currents, plus and minus, physician and surgeon, teacher and preacher. Tvashta is the creative and formative power of nature and humanity that makes the forms such as sun and earth, various living species and human institutions. Pusha is the power of nourishment, growth and health. Samudra is the unfathomable, all bearing space and all tolerant generosity of peace. Dyau is the heaven of light, knowledge and enlightenment. Prthivi is the earth and undisturbed, inviolable human spirit of sustenance. Read with Purusha Sukta of the Veda, this sukta may betaken as the voice of Purusha reverberating from the individual to the cosmic dimensions of existence. 
786 :I am Rashtri Devi, light of life, voice of omniscience, universal power and speech all bearing, all borne, co-existent with eleven Rudras, pranic energies, eight Vasus, earth, water, fire, air, space, sun, moon and stars, all abodes and supports of life, twelve Adityas, twelve yearly phases of the sun, and the Vishvedevas, generous and creative divinities of nature and humanity. I bear and support both M itra and Varuna, day and night, I bear and support I ndra and Agni, cosmic energy and vitality of life and intelligence. I bear and support both the A shvi ns, al I compl ementari es of nature and humanity such as positive and negative currents of energy circuit in operation, science and technology, physician and surgeon, teacher and preacher. 
787 :I am the spirit and organisation of the social system. I am the pioneer and harbinger of the wealth, honours and excellences of the corporate system. I am thethought, awareness and determined organisation and constitution of the basics of human life, its principles and values. Scholars, sages and leaders establish me in many socio-political forms with many permament stabilities and many evolving powers and possibilities of progress in many directions. 
788 :I myself speak all this that is loved, adored and spoken by sages and veteran scholars and even by mortals of average but honest mind. Whosoever I love for his or her merit of nature, character and performance, I raise to brilliance, to piety worthy of a yajnic Brahma, to the vision of a poetic sage and the high intelligence of an exceptional thinker. 
789 :O listener, listen, what I say to you is worth listening, believing and doing in faith: Whoever sees whatever he sees, whoever breathes whatever he breathes for energy, whoever hears whatever is said, he receives all that as the food of life from me. Those who do not listen, do not care, do not believe but reject what I say and so neglect me, waste themselves away, they come to ruin. 
790 :I draw the bow for Rudra, powers of justice and punishment, to eliminate the forces of hate and violence against the lovers and observers of piety and divinity. I fight for the people and create felicity and joy for them, and I reach and pervade the heaven and earth. 
791 :I bear the rul i ng soma j oy of corporate exi stence, how people experience and express it. I bear and support Tvashta, Pusha and Bhaga, formative evolution, nourishment and growth, and the power, excellence and rising glory of the human nation. I bear and bring the wealth and prosperity of life for the yajamana who creates sweetness and light for life and offers liberal havi in the corporate yajna for the common welfare of humanity and indeed for all life. 
792 :I create the parental protector on top of this human nation and this world in the form of the ruler and the sun. M y place and presence is in the oceanic depth of waters and in the expanding particles of space. That same way I abide in all worlds of the universe, and I reach the high heaven of light and touch the very top of it with my light and grandeur. 
793 :Loving, embracing and pervading all regions of the universe, I flow forward like the wind that blows across over all spaces. Beyond the heaven, beyond this earthly world, I am, so much is my power and potential, transcendent is my presence. 
794 :O Manyu, spirit of vaulting passion without compromise with negativities, may our leading lights, warriors of universal rectitude, riding the chariot with you, breaking through paths of advancement, joyous, bold, undaunted, stormy like wind shears, their arrows Iike Iazer beams, weapons sharp and blazing, go forward like flames of fire. 
795 :O Manyu, blazing like fire, commanding our forces, spirit of forbearance and challenge, invoked and called upon, come to lead our battles of life, face the en em i es to d estroy th e ad v ersar i es and share the w eal th, beauty and goodness of life with all. O spirit comprehending lustrous light of life, move forward, push the adversaries back and throw out the enemies. 
796 :O wrath of justice, rectitude and dispensation, arise, challenge the adversaries for our system, breaking, smashing, eliminating the forces of negation. Blazing is your force and courage, none to obstruct and stop your advance. You are the master, all in control, leader of theforces of predominance, sole one born of divinity without an equal. 
797 :M anyu, you are the one unique among many, invoked and universally adored. Pray instruct, inspire, prepare and perfect every community to fight and win against negativity and adversity. Your Iustre unimpaired and unchallengeable, with you as leader and inspirer, let us raise the battle cry and hoist the flag of victory flying sky high. 
798 :Uncontradicted, irreproachable, victorious like Indra, O M anyu, be our protector and promoter here throughout life. For sure, O spirit of courage, forbearance and victory, we adore you, dear and adorablefor all. Weknow whereyou arise from, fountain head of the lust for life, inspiration and victory: Dharma and universal love of life. 
799 :Twin brother of the ardour and glory of life, thunderboltof divine humanity, unfailing targeted arrow, you bear the higher ardour of human love and passion for life. O M anyu, sweetest companion of living splendour universally invoked and adored, come to us with the force of unfailing yajnic action in the heat of the grand battle scene of life. 
800 :LetM anyu, passion for life and ardour for glory, and Varuna, commanding ruler with judgement and sense of honour, bear and bring us wealth, honour and excellence both nobly created and acquired with courage and wisdom, and let the enemies, their hearts stricken with fear and their spirits defeated, run away from the field of life's battle. 
801 :O M anyu, spirit of passion and ardour, awful as thunder and accurate as an arrow to hit the target, whoever bears, honours and commands you with strength and enthusiasm, rises in universal honour and splendour. We pray thatwith your friendly and unfailing courage, patience and vigour we may support the noble and defeat the violent and destroyers. 
802 :M anyu, righteous passion and courage of mind, is Indra, glory and power, manyu is brilliance, manyu isthecall for yajna and theyajamana, manyu isVaruna, deep as ocean, blazing as sun and self-confidence of choice. Manyu is Jataveda, spirit of intelligence and existential awareness. Communities which live all over the human world honour and adore manyu. O spirit of passion and universal intelligence of divine mind, dearest friend and inner inspiration, pray protect and promote us with the strength and discipline of body, mind and soul. 
803 :Come manyu, stronger than strength itself, one with valour and austerity of discipline, destroy the enemies, O saviour of friends and destroyer of adversaries, dispel I er of darkness, eliminator of evil and negativities, and bear and bring us all wealth, honour and excellence of the world. 
804 :O manyu, you command the courage and valour of the victor, you are self-existent and self-justified, lustrous and exalting, and shatterer of challenging adversaries. You are the all-watching spirit over the world, all power controller and commander of strength, endurance and spirit of challenge. Pray bear and vest in us lustre and fighting strength for our progress and victory in the battles of life. 
805 :Being void of righteous passion, O spiritual rectitude, giver of confidence and assertive identity, I am gone far from my own self and, by action, deprived of your spirit of lustre and inspiration. O manyu, I am guilty of remiss towards you, and I have come to you in shame. You are by yourself the embodiment of courage and passion. Pray come and bless us with strength of body, courage of mind and determination of the spirit. 
806 :H ere I am for you, O spirit of courage and self- assertion, all giver and sustainer for the world, come, turn to me, universal spirit. O spirit of awful passion and undaunted self identity, wielder of the thunderbolt, come constantly, let us together dispel darkness and destroy evil. Pray inspire and awaken me, your own self. 
807 :Pray come forward and be on our right side in your own place, and together we shall eliminate all darkness and adversity. I offer you the best, foremost and sweetest honeyed homage of the self, and we shall together drink of the joy of victory in closest intimacy. 
808 :Agni, Spirit of light and purity, pray shine on us, burn off our sins and evil, purify and sanctify our wealth, honour and excellence, cleanse off our sins and evil and let us shine in purity. 
809 :With the desire for waving green fields, straight and simple highways of life, and honest wealth of body, mind and soul and power of defence and protection, we approach and honour you. O Agni, lord of light and power, burn off our sins and let us shine in purity. 
810 :A s you are the highest honoured and exalted of these that are your radiations, which are our heroes too and brilliant guides, pray cleanse us of our sins and evil and let us shine in purity. 
811 :Agni, as your leading lights are, so may we rise to be. Pray cleanse us of our sins and evil and let us shine in purity with power divine. 
812 :As the lights of this powerful Agni go up all round in mighty blaze, so may we be with light and power. O lord of light and power, purge us of our sins and pollution and let us shine in purity and original power. 
813 :Agni, you are the light, universal presence, all watching lord supreme over the worlds of existence. B urn off our sins and let us shine in purity. 
814 :O lord of universal presence and power, like a saving ark over the seas, take us over and aross the whirlpools of jealousy and enmity of the world. Burn off our sins and evil and let us shine all pure. 
815 :As we cross a river in flood by boat, so may Agni purge us and help us cross the seas of existence for the sake of the good life and all round well being. O lord, purge us of our sins and evil, let us shine in original purity and power with piety in the state of grace. 
816 :This world of existence is an expansive cosmic yajna. The agent, object, food and fragrance of it all is the Lord Supreme, Brahma itself, the immanent efficient cause, the transcendent presiding power and the generator of yajnic food and form, Prakrti, for the participant souls of human and other orders (Gita, 9, 24; 8, 4; 4, 24). All this divine yajna is self-manifested and self-enacted by self-will, tapas (Rgveda 10, 90). 
817 :Within thecosmic yajna of Purusha and Prakrti, the human order also is a yajna in its own epicyclic order, and within that order, Grhastha, home life of family, also is a yajna, and this it is our duty to extend. 
818 :This sukta may better be read with the Purusha sukta (Rgveda 10, 90, Yajurveda 31, Atharva-veda 19, 6), reflections of which are found in the Upanishads and the Gita. 
819 :This universe is an expansive yajna born of divine self-will, tapas, the presiding power and immanent one soul of which is the Supreme Cosmic Self. That is its content, odana, as well as its container, A dhi-yajna. Brahma, SupremeSoul, is its pinnacle, Veda is its climactic knowledge and wisdom. The expansive world of nature is its back and burden, the living world is its womb wherein it broods on itself and generates forms of life. Vedic verses are its joyous sides, and truth and law is its mouth proclaiming loud and bold with words and beauty of nature's play. 
820 :Yajna is expansive, born of divine as well as human tapas: The head of it is the Veda, Rathantara Sama, B rhat Sama is the back, Vamadevya Sama is the middle, Vedic verses are the sides, and truth is its mouth and tongue of flame.) Souls with constant mind, undistracted, holy in conduct and character, purified by pranayama, pure, unsullied by anything within or without, rise to the region of purity. In that region of bliss, the yajnic fire and revelation of truth does not destroy, in fact, it maintains their creative spirit and sustains their productivity in abundance. (They maintain their bliss, creativity and productivity of happy family life through the performance of yaj na, a real symbol ic act si mul ati ng the cosmic creative yajna.) Want and distress never afflicts those who maintain the epicycle of yajna and prepare the holy food for yajnic homage and thus serve the divine spirit of yajna. The person who abides by the discipline of external and internal law of Yama rises to the spirit of divinity, associates with the divines, and rejoices with the Gandharvas with whom he shares the peace and pleasure of life on earth. 
821 :(To appreciate the joyous peace and pleasure of the Gandharva state of being, refence may be made to A nanda Valli of Taittiriya U panishad 2, 8,1-12.) Those who prepare the yajnic food and offer it i nto the expansive yajna of the universe rise to the devas, and Y ama, the I aw of I ife, does not deprive them of their spirit of creative vitality. Such a person becomes the happy master of his body chariot, goes forward in his chariot and like a bird rises high beyond the region of light to divine bliss. 
822 :This human yajna of the home is the most extensive of all yajnas. Having accomplished this vast yaj na, the yaj amana reaches the heaven of I i ght and bl i ss. There in that state of paradisal bliss of the home, the yajamana, lover of peace, sowing seeds of noble karmic fruit, extends the attainable earthly joy of vital, dynamic possibilities of karma: lotus shoots and fibres sweet to taste, water lilies in bloom with delicious oval fruit, and all this with germinative potential. May all these abundant streams of joy flow for you, bearing honey sweets, and may all lakes and streams of lotus bloom be for you. 
823 :ghrta, banks of delicious shade and fragrance, full of exciting drink, overflowing with milk, water, curds and exuberant honey, all full of fragrant flowers, flow for you in the state of paradisal bliss. 
824 :I give you four potfuls (of Dharma, artha, kama and Moksha) four ways (of Brahmacharya, grhastha, vanaprastha and sanyasa), all full of the waters of life, milk of love and kindness, and curds of exciting energy. May all these abundant streams of fragrant flower-joy and honey sweets, rising and raising you in the state of paradisal bliss, flow by you for you. 
825 :This paradisal food and fruitof yajna, expansive, life fulfilling, leading to paradisal bliss, I ordain and enjoin for preparation and yajnic homage to divinity among the lovers of Veda and the universal spirit of existence. May that never diminish for me and never be neglected by me. In stead, itself rising and raising us with its own innate strength and augmented by yajnic offers of fragrant food, may it be for us a universal mother giver of the fulfilment of our cherished desires and noble ambitions. 
826 :Brahmaudana, divine food of life, which Prajapati, divine generator and sustainerof his creation, first self-manifested of Rtam, laws and dynamics of existence, brooded over, perfected and brought into being by 'tapas', his will and power, for his selfmanifestation as well as for the expansive manifested universe, which is the mainstay of the worlds of existence and the people therei n, never decays, nor does ithurt anyone. By thatvery food of lifel wouldconquer and outlive death unto eternity. 
827 :(Brahmaudana here can be interpreted as 'Brahma that itself is the food of life', and 'life that is the food of Brahma'. Both ways, the interpretation is the same with reference to human life. 
828 :In Shatapatha Brahmana (13, 1, 1, 4) and in Taittiriya Brahmana (3, 8, 2, 4) Odana is interpreted as Retas, creativity of divinity. Rgveda 10,129 also speaks of the precreation stage of existence as the state of Brahma existing with its creative power. And power and the powerful both are one, together, integrated. Odana is also interpreted as Brahmacharya, the way of life in which one knows as well as lives the life divine with perfect self control. 
829 :So, if B rahma is the food of life, it means that you dedicate your life and time to Brahma as your sole object of love and service. On the other hand, if life is the food of Brahma, you totally surrender yourself to B rahma. I n one case, B rahma is your food, in the other, you are the food of B rahma. 
830 :How do we conquer death by Brahma? Our life on earth is a cycle of birth, age and death: Life is body and soul together, death is seperation of the two. If we identify ourselves with life-in-body, we identify ourselves with the motal despite our immortality. B ut if we know our real nature and live in full awareness as such and dedicate ourselves to Brahma, we abide in freedom from the ravages of mortality. Death then becomes irrelevant and meaningless, at best a stage in the journey. Thus we conquer death and outlive it in the state of freedom from mortality. Thus we become identified with eternity, with Brahma. 
831 :By that very sustaining spirit of the universe, life-forming powers of nature abide beyond death. By that very spirit, all-form-realised souls attain to immortality beyond form with relentless practice of meditation. By the same spiritual food of life, Vedic knowledge and meditation, which eternal Brahma prepared and perfected for us in the expansive universe, I too would conquer and outlive death and attain to immortality. 
832 :Brahma, who holds and sustains mother earth which provides food for all forms of life, who fills the skies with abundant waters of life, who with his grand might and majesty sustains the suns and heavens above, by the same Brahma, I too would conquer and outlive death and attain to life eternal. 
833 :By the same food of life, by which the wheels of monthly time with thirty spokes of days are formed, by which the yearly wheels of time with twelve spokes of months are formed, which the day-night revolutions of time ever on the move forward overtake not, by that very spiritual food of Brahma, I too would conquer and outlive death and attain to life eternal. 
834 :He that is the life source of the life-givers of existence, in whose service universal regions of life abound in ghrta and shower the nectar of life, whose light of life all quarters of space hold and radiate, by that very spiritual food of Brahma I too would conquer and outlive death and attain to life eternal. 
835 :From whose perfect nature and creativity, the nectar of immortality of life is generated, who is the lord master and creator of the Gayatri joy of existence, in whose omniscience all the Vedas of the universal forms and branches of knowledge are treasured, by that very spiritual food of B rahma I too would conquer and outlive death and achieve the life eternal. 
836 :I stop and ward off those hostilities which forestall or distract my thoughts of divinity. Let all adversaries, all negativities get off my mind. I have developed and perfected the all-world-victorious food of divinity for my soul. Listen ye all, divine, brilliant sages, this voice of the faithful me. 
837 :Let generous Agni, commander of the blaze of truth, all-watching ruler of humanity, burn those forces of negativity which intend to hurt us, subject us to adversity and rob us of felicity. 
838 :Whoever it is that wants to injure us who never wish to injure anyone, whoever it is that wants to injure him who tries to injure others, I subject to the jaws of Agni, all watching Ruler's dispensation of justice. 
839 :Whoever in the home, in disputes or in gatherings and crowds, hurts and hunts others for nothing, whoever the flesh eater, whoever the injurer of others, let me challenge and punish them all with the force of justice. 
840 :I challenge and punish all exploiters and blood suckers with power and force of justice. I disarm them of their power and money which are their instruments of exploitation and violence. I destroy all forces of evil and injustice so that my ethics, policy and programme of justice may be fulfilled. 
841 :T hose noble people w ho feel sati sfi ed and happy with that policy and programme, those dynamic people who measure the speed and success of the programme by the light of the sun, those that live by rivers and on the hills, with all these watchful people I meet and associate to seek their cooperation. 
842 :I am the fire and fear of justice and punishment for the violent and the blood suckers like a tiger to the keepers of flocks of sheep and cows,so that, like the dogs which flee in terror of the lion, they find no place to hide and escape. 
843 :I cannot tolerate and cannot compromise with thieves, highway men and blood-sucking exploiters. These evils disappear from the village wherever I enter and the rule of law and justice operates. 
844 :Whichever the village or human settlement where the heat and awe of my law, justice and power operates, from that place the law breakers and forces of violence disappear, never dare they revive their propensity to sin and crime. 
845 :Those whisperers, jabbers and idle protesters who try to provoke my anger as mosquitoes buzzzing around an elephant do, I reject as ineffectual undesirables like short lived moths among the people. 
846 :Like a rope arresting a horse, adversity would seize that malcontent, who smoulders in anger against me. H e would never be free from that noose. 
847 :O all-cleansing herb, by you the veteran scholars of Atharvani science of fire and soma destroy life threatening germs. By you the microbiologist, Kashyapa, destroys germs of disease. By you Kanva, the technologist, and Agastya, specialist of water pollution, destroys germs of disease. 
848 :By you we drive off water borne and air borne diseases. O Ajashrngi, remove disease bearing germs, destroy them all by smell. 
849 :Let the water borne diseases flow out like fast streams of water carrying off all dirt and pollution. O water borne germs and bacteria, you have been diagnosed, therefore get off now. The cure of all these are five herbs: gulgulu, pila, naladi, aukshagandhi and pramandani. 
850 :Where there are great trees like Ashvattha (peepal), Nyagrodha (banyan), Shikhandin (gunja creeper), and birds like peacock, from there, O water borne diseases, get off. Diagnosed you are, and off you go. 
851 :O diseases, where againstyou are green, waving Arjuna trees, there are aghata (apamarga) and karkari, waving with rustling leaves, there off you go, you are well diagnosed. 
852 :And here it is, most powerful of the herbs, ajashrngi, very efficacious, which destroys the subtle causes of disease at the fastest. 
853 :I also destroy the eggs of the females and breeding power of the males of the carriers of air borne and water borne diseases, rising and spreading alI round. 
854 :Deadly are the strikes of the rays of the sun, hundred-fold for the destruction of pollution and contamination, shattering like thunder. With these let the physician and health powers destroy the air borne, water borne and food contaminating germs. 
855 :Golden energisers are rays of the sun, deadly destroyers, of hundredfold power, terrible killers of disease germs. With these, let the physician eliminate food and water plant contaminators, air borne viruses O herb, burn up and eliminate all consumptive and cancerous contaminations in my blood, destroy all blood suckers and with your power crush them to the root. 
856 :One is like a dog, another like a monkey, yet another with hair all over the body is a cruel killer and, being pretty and dear to the eye, afflicts the women. These psychic diseases we destroy and root out from herewith the powerful Brahmi herb. 
857 :O Gandharvas, psychic disorders, you are the masters. Diseases of the blood and body are your secondary and subordinate forms. Get away, you are The subject of this hymn is 'apsaras' in the positive sense, not in the negative sense of the last sukta. Apsaras has been interpreted as ladies of the home, currents of natural energy, and as energy and power of the spirit and spiritual awareness. All of these interpretations have one common content: Energy, operative everywhere, whether it is operating in the home, or in the spirit, or in the environment. Its diversifications have been interpreted as pranic energies, operations of natural energy, rays of the sun, currents of wind, curative operations of herbal energy and exhilarations of soma. Vrshabha has been interpreted as the source and master of the apsaras. 
858 :Here I invoke Apsara which overthrows the negativities of life and wins over opposition, which is thespiritof holy and divine action and leading performer of noble deeds in the dynamics of life's evolutionary and developmental programmes. 
859 :I invoke the A psara, noble and divine of action, collecting and distributing herfavours, and securing and consolidating into her power and grasp all the results of her performance in the evolution of life. 
860 :A psara who, with her noble acts, rejoices and celebrates life in song and dance, collecting and consolidating the achievements of her performance in the evolutionary struggle of life, may, we pray, guiding and organising our actions, achieve further progress by her wonderful power and intelligence. May she, abounding in the waters and food of life continue to come and bless us so that none may win away this wealth of achievement from us. 
861 :She who, in all her diversifications, bearing the purity and righteous passion for life, rejoices at the centre of the advance of al I human affai rs, herself happy celebrant and exhilarating all others, that Apsara I invoke and adore here in life. 
862 :She who, in all her diversifications, radiating with the rays of the sun and vibrating with the particles of cosmic energy, goes about, and her omnipotent master who pervades far and near, commanding and superintending all the energies and protecting and sustaining all their regions of cosmic operation, may he too, lord commander and energiser of cosmic lights and energies, listen to this voice of thought, love this yajna of communion, comewith his omnipresence in the time and spaceof divine bliss, and blessmy spirit at the heart- core. 
863 :O lord omnipresent commander of omnipotence, comewith universal bliss, bless this happy vibrant soul, your darling child. These sparks of light and exuberant showers of bliss are vibrations of your presence. Come direct, let your power and presence be here. This mind and intelligence is dedicated to you. Let the power and presence abide here. 
864 :O lord omnipresent, commander of nature's universal omnipotence, be here in the heart and soul. Sustain the light and bliss of the celebrant, your darling child. This soul is dedicated to you as food for total absorption. This mind and intelligence with all the senses and pranas is dedicated to you for absolute dwelling. Herein we concentrate all our awareness, chitishakti, enveloped as your darling child in the mother's lap. A s your name, so do we adore your being and abide in your presence. This is our homage in truth of thought, word and deed. 
865 :(This mantra may be read with refence to sukta 34 and 35 on the subject of B rahmaudana.) On the earth, people bow to Agni for the sake of progress and prosperity. Agni, energy and generosity of the earth, blesses them with abundance and prosperity. Just as people bow to Agni on the earth, so may favours of the earth and earthly energy come to me and lead me to prosperity and humility. 
866 :The earth is a mother cow, Agni, fire and magnetic energy, is her calf. May the earth, with her calf-like energy, give me the energy and power I need for my earthly fulfilment leading to prime health, long age, progeny, nourishment, wealth, honour and excellence. This is the prayer in homage to the mother in truth of thought, word and deed. 
867 :People honour and adore Vayu energy in the firmament. The energy and generosity of Vayu from the sky blesses them with prosperity, j ust as people adore Vayu in the sky, so may favours of Vayu come to me and lead me to prosperity and humility. 
868 :The sky is a mother cow, Vayu, electric energy, is her calf. May the sky with its calf-like electric energy give me energy and fulfilment and bless me with prime health, long age, good progeny, nourishment, wealth, honour and excellence. This is the prayer in homage to the mother in truth of thought, word and deed. 
869 :People honour and adore the sun in heaven. The light and warmth of the sun from heaven blesses them with prosperity. Just as people adore the sun in heaven, so may favours of the sun come to me and lead me to prosperity and humility. 
870 :The heaven is a mother cow, the sun is her calf. May mother heaven with her calf-like light energy give me enlightenment and fulfilment and bless me with prime health, long age, noble progeny, nourishment, wealth, honour and excellence. This is my prayer in homageto the mother in truth of thought, word and deed. 
871 :People love and adore the moon in quarters of space. The moon blesses them with the prosperity of peace and herbal soma. Just as people turn to the moon and adore her in space, so may favours of the moon come to me and lead me to abundance of peace and joy with humility. 
872 :The quarters of space are a mother cow, the moon is their calf. May mother space with her calf-like beauty, peace and soma give me the energy that is in peace and fulfilment with prime health, long age, noble progeny, nourishment, and the wealth of honour and excellence. This is my prayer to the mother in truth of thought, word and deed in all sincerity. 
873 :Agni, light of life and entire existence, vibrates omnipresent, pervading all forms of nature's energy. Experienced through the vibrancy of Rshi pranas, revealed by the sages, sanctifier of mind and senses, it is our saviour against sin, evil and malignity. O lord of universal energy and humanity, I come to you with self surrender, salutations and homage in all sincerity. O celebrants, let us never, with insincerity and hypocrisy, pollute and desecrate what is due to the divinities in gratefulness to their favours. 
874 :O Jataveda, lord omnipresent in the world of existence, O lord self-refulgent and omnificent, omniscient of all the laws of Rtam and paths and ways of things born, O light and fire of life, seven are your flames of fire, seven are your mouths for the evolution and involution of creation, i.e., five elements, senses and mind. For them and through all five senses, mind and intelligence of mine, I come, surrender and join you with homage of the self, purified and sanctified at heart with faith. Pray accept this homage and bless me. 
875 :O Jataveda, omniscient lord of light, di scri mi nation and j usti ce, there are those w ho f i rst offer the tribute of homage upfront from the east and then from the same direction attack and try to enslave us. Later, when they face Agni, lord of light and discriminative vision, they come to nothing. I hit and destroy them straight with an equal and opposite weapon. 
876 :-rM w i h i ^rq-R^ri H i-hiWi czrai ^ i y rM jfn ihjIh^ui 1 if^TII ^ II O J ataveda, those who first offer the tribute of homage from the right side, southern quarter, and then from the same direction attack and try to enslave us, later, when they face Yama, lord of justice and punishment, come to nothing. I hit and destroy them straight with an equal and opposite stroke. 
877 :O J ataveda, those who first offer the tribute of homage from the back side, western quarter, and them from the same direction attack and try to enslave us, later, when they face Varuna, lord of judgement and dispensation, come to nothing. I hit them back and destroy them straight with an equal and opposite stroke. 
878 :O J ataveda, those who first offer the tribute of homage from the left side, northern quarter, and then from the same direction attack and try to enslave us, later, when they face Soma, lord of peace and honour, come to nothing. I hit them back and destroy them straight with an equal and opposite stroke. 
879 :O J ataveda, those, who first offer the tribute of homage from below and then from the same lower direction attack us and try to enslave us, later, when they face Mother Earth, mother of all her children equally, come to nothing. I hit them back and destroy them straight with an equal and opposite blow. 
880 :O J ataveda, those who first offer the tribute of homage from the sky and then from the same upper direction attack us and try to enslave us come to nothing, when later they face Vayu, mighty force of nature's retribution. I hit them back and destroy them straight with an equal and opposite blow. 
881 :O J ataveda, those who first offer the tribute of homage from above and from the same high direction attack us and try to enslave us come to nothing, when later they face Surya, solar blaze of the pure light of truth. I hit them back and destroy them straight with an equal and opposite blow. 
882 :O J ataveda, those who first offer the tribute of homage from the middle spaces of all directions and then from al I those di recti ons attack us and try to enslave us later come to naught when they face Brahma, eternal lord of light and life and ultimate justcie. I hit them back and destroy them straight with a single blow of equal and opposite force. 
883 :Brahma, Lord of infinite thought and mantric word of knowledge, who first manifests Prakrti as self- generative self-evolving power, one with immortal pranic energy pervasive in the expansive universe, holy spirit in every thing born, redoubtable power, refulgent as the sun, ever existent in the three orders of time and space, mainstay of the universe and all forms of life, sustains the three worlds of heaven, earth and the middle regions. 
884 :He, the primal power that floats and superintends the laws of nature, then shapes the many forms of existence, is the all sustainer that first enters the cosmic womb of nature and knows the Word of O lord, whosoever the person that cleanses his personality of material opaqueness to realise your light divine, his crystalline pure faculties turned inward concentrating on the golden light at the heart core, the heaven and earth for sure bear here itself immortal robes of I i ght f or hi m w hi I e al I hi s seventeen f acul ti es of sense, mind and energy inspire him. 
885 :When these faculties, covering and stablising through every step (i.e., bhumi of the yoga consciousness) of the path to clairvoyance, reach the eternal unaging light of the saviour spirit, the man becomes a kavi, a visionary soul, and heaven and earth, both caressing mother spirits of mighty omniscience, reveal the supreme master and burden bearer of the universe for the sister spirit and inspire the visionary. 
886 :Thus do I, O lord of universal motion, I, the poet, offer great homage to you with poetry while both heaven and earth, moving together in unison like two gear w heel s, i nspi re and energi se me tow ards real i sati on of my ultimate haven. 
887 :Seven are the paths and bounds of the good life which wise visionaries have created and setup. Of these, let the sinner follow even one, steadfast in life as the pillar and the goal post, and he would be saved, and at the end of the journey he would rest in peace under the shelter of the lord, the closest and the highest master. On the other hand, if a man violates even one of them, he would be a sinner, lost and gone. 
888 :to my vows of discipline, I go forward in Iife. This way, prana, the soul and the body, all together, rise higher, and the Lord Almighty too bears the jewels of life for the person who, with offers of homage and yajnic devotion, serves the Lord with all his power and potential without reserve. 
889 :Child of divinity, I pray to Almighty Father for protection. People call upon the highest for all round happiness and well being, the Lord who sets the bounds of discipline and life'svalues. O Varuna, revealing what your bounds of order and discipline are, pray show us those bounds, for you alone shape those forms and classes of Being to which the soul moves from one to another in the course of existence. 
890 :O Lord of wisdom and omniscience, you complete the expansive universe with ever abundant food of life. You increase the universal potential with expansive power, leaving nothing wanting. 
891 :O friends, let us exalt Varuna, protector, all potent, friendly, saviour of all, inspiring spirit of inviolable Mother Nature, and let us celebrate the heaven and earth, embodiments of the veracity of existence, and many forms of its various reality sung and celebrated by poets. 
892 :This Indra, Brahma, is the first and highest in the worlds of existence, of which is born the refulgent, blazing, potent sun, which, as it arises, destroys the enemies such as darkness and negativities which damage life, and by the existence and power of which all positive and protective powers and all people rejoice, celebrate life and exalt him. 
893 :destroyer of negativities, it strikes terror into the heart of those forces which cause damage to life and the environment. Bounteous friend and sustainer of the breathing and non-breathing world, all people and powers which receive growth and sustenance from you join to do honour to you in their joy and celebration of life. 
894 :And they all, celebrants of divinity, dedicate all their yajnic actions and prayers to you when they join in two and grow to three in the family. O lord sweeter than sweetness itself, join the sweets of life with honey, and with honey and with divine bliss create life overflowing with sweetness, love and ecstasy. 
895 :Thus with joy in every battle of life, on every occasion of life grateful people and vibrant sages celebrate and exalt you, winner, creator and giver of wealth and excellence. Illustrious lord of shattering power, expand the common-wealth of permanent values. 
896 :Let not the crooked and fiendish forces on the prowl suppress the creative gifts of divine generosity. 
897 :With your divine inspiration, well knowing the weapons of war between divines and demons, we fight out the enemies of life in the battles of humanity. I strengthen and calibrate the arms and ammunitions for battle by your divine words, and by the same divine formula I sharpen the target efficacy of the arrows and missiles of offence and defence. 
898 :You sustain this physical world close at hand and visible to the eye and also the other invisible world of metaphysical and spiritual reality in which you protect and maintain every thing with your power in their very home and in their nature. O friends, stabilise the motherly presence of divine love, vibrant and victorious, in your heart and thereby win over all doubts and fluctuations and achieve your goals. 
899 :O dedicated man of generous heart, worship and adore the lord of universal presence, self-refulgent, glorious, omniscient wise over all the wise self-realised sages, closer at hand than anything else. That lord of infinite might shines by his own light all round, and symbolically takes over the image of the vast mother earth. 
900 :Enlightened sage, eminent, most wise of divine vision, having realised heavenly light, offers these songs in honour of I ndra who, self-refulgent ruler of this mighty domi ni on, awful Iy blazing i n glory, faster than the fastest, radiates and vibrates in the infinite ocean of space. 
901 :Thus does the great sage of exalted vision and wisdom, his mind and heart at peace in samadhi, address the infinite spirit of Indra, immanent in his own self. These two, heaven and earth, rotating in the mother presence of Indra, both sinless, address and exalt that lord with ail their might. Thus also the mind and intelligence of the sage, both free from pollution and fluctuations, celebrate and exalt the spirit of the sage. 
902 :O light of life, Agni, letmy lustre and splendour shine in battles of the brave and assemblies of the wise. May we, lighting and exalting you in yajnic contests, strengthen and advance ourselves in body, mind and soul in the open social order. Let the four directions of the earth recognise and accept me with due honour and felicitation. Let us all win all round in the struggles for higher life under your leadership and watchful eye. 
903 :humanity, challenging and throwing out the power and passion of those others, our adversaries, be our guide and protect us al I round for our advance. Let our abusers go down and out, and let the morale of those too who are awake and alert in their position be cast down to naught. (The struggle is both for higher personality in the individual context and social advancement in the collective context of humanity, and the prayer is for conquest of the ego and egoistic divisive interests for the attainment of higher and universal values.) May all the Devas, divine powers and faculties, be with me when the battle begins: M aruts, i.e., pranic energies, the best of men and all the fortynine orders of the wind, Vishnu, all pervasive personal, social and environemental commitment, Agni, personal enthusiasm, social passion and universal enlightenment, all in top form of passion and energy. May the Antariksha, middle region of space, moral awareness, and moderate people of balanced mind be vast and I i beral for open ended possi bi I iti es of progress, and may the wi nds blow favourabl e for the success of this mission of mine. 
904 :May success come to me in all I desire to perform. May all purposes, intentions and resolutions of mind be true and fruitful. May I never come to think of any sin or evil whatever against the self or society or nature or Divinity. May all divinities of nature and humanity, all my faculties of mind and sense protect and help in this battle of life here and now. 
905 :May all divinities of life and nature bear and bring me wealth, honour and excellence of life. May their blessings and good wishes ever be showered on me. May I too be able to sustain my mind and will to invokethedivinitiesfor help and grace. May thedivine performers of life's yajna bless us with all this power and good will for success, and may we all be brave and inviolable in body, mind and soul. 
906 :O divine six-dimentional spaces of expansive nature and time, help us grow all round without strain in person and humanity. O divinities of life of all the world, rejoice and be here with us to bless us with the glory and ecstasy of living. Let no depression, no malignity or imprecation, no alienation, no jealousy or hostility, ever touch and pollute us in body, mind and soul against nature and society. 
907 :May three mother divinities, Ida, M other Nature and W i sdom of the absolute state of exi stence, Sarasvati, mother spiritof dynamic knowledgeand enlightenment, and M ahi, mother earth and the universal values of her children, provide us great expansive joy of peace and well being, and bless us with whatever is good for the growth and advancement of our personality and our people. May we never feel depressed or alienated on account of our health and personality and our people. O Soma, refulgent ruler and ordainerof peace and living joy, let us never be subjected to the forces of jealousy and adversity. 
908 :May the great lord of glory and Infinity, omnificent and universally invoked, give us peace and prosperity in a happy home. O lord omnipotent, Indra, controller of the dynamic forces of life and nature, be kind and gracious to us, for our people, pray never hurt us, never al i enate us, never forsake us to the other forces of evil and negativity. 
909 :May Dhata, lord sustainer of life and the universe, Vidhata, controller and director of the course of history and natural evolution, Savita, self-refulgent creator and inspirer who is the parental protector of the world and destroyer of adversity, negativity and enmity, Adityas, twelve phases of the sun over the year, Rudras, powers of love and graces, destroyers of suffering and injustice, and all the pranic energies of life, both the Ashvins, twin forces of nature's complementarity operative in existence, and all the divine brilliancies of natural and human powers: may all these protect and promote the yajamana against adversity and fall from grace. 
910 :Whoever be our adversaries, opponents and enemies, let them all be out. We keep them off by the power of Indra and the light and leadership of Agni, omnipotent and omniscient, both our powers of defence and advancement. May A dityas, power of light refulgent as sun, Rudras, powers of love, justice and relentless law, all rising and touching the heights of possibility and divinity, raise us to the state of the power, passion and enlightenment of self-rule, social governanace and superhuman knowledge and wisdom, vision of divinity ultimately. 
911 :We invoke Indra, lord omnipotent, from there on top of divine sovereignty and yet present here right in front at the universal human level, Indra who is the winner of lands, cows, culture and enlightenment, who isthewinner of wealth, honour and excellence, and who i s the w i nner of horses, advancement and attainment of the highest goal for us. May the lord hear our invocation and prayer in this yajnic battle of progress. May the lord be gracious, who commands all the contrary- complementarities of nature and humanity and raise us to the level of divine love and grace. 
912 :(This hymn isthesong of the ascent of lifefrom human to the divine which is the highest possible attainment for humans on the personal as well as on the organisational level. Personal progress is the threefold growth of body, mind and spirit. Similarly socio- organisational progress too is threefold, individual, collective and global upto the cosmic. Joining both dimensions, we have the physical, mental and spiritual growth of the individual, social and cosmic personality of existence as it is.) O Kushtha, strongest of the herbs born and growing on the mountains, destroyer of takman, come and cure the fever, psoriasis and leprosy from here. 
913 :Born and grown on snowy mountain where herbs of beautiful leaves and golden efficacy with poisonous antidote grow, when people hear of it as the destroyer of takman, they go and get it even with money and lots of wealth. 
914 :Inthethird highest level of the body isthe brain, top of the human organism where the centres of devas, sense and will organs of the body are seated, and thus that is the top of the human personality. There the humans havethe vision of divinity in meditation. There the divine efficacies of nature and of the sanative herb start the cure of the kushtha ailment as there the divine souls of humanity have a vision of divinity. 
915 :Thegolden boat of golden bands and tackle, i.e., the golden imagination of man, sojourns in the highest region of golden light. There too blooms the flower of immortality. And there in the golden region of the brain the divines cure the takman fever with the kushtha herb. 
916 :Golden are the paths of manly sojourn. Golden are the oars of the boat, saviours from sin and disease. Golden are the boats to cross the seas. By these do the divines find and bring the kushtha herb for cure. 
917 :O kushtha herb, raise this patient for me, raise him to freedom from takman, restore him to good health and freedom from suffering. 
918 :You are born for the divines, for their senses, mind and imagination, you arethefriend and companion of soma for all good purposes. O herb, be good and efficacious for this patient of mine, for his prana and vyana energies of vitality and for his eye of inner and outer vision. 
919 :Rising and growing from snowy mountains, it is brought to the people in the east where they distinguish its different names and best qualities and benefit from it. 
920 :O kushtha, best is your name and quality, noblest is your producer and protector. Remove all consumptive and cancerous diseases. M ake the takman fever totally ineffective. 
921 :A ilments of the head and brain, weaknesses of the eye, infirmities of the body, kushtha cures all. Truly it is vigour and power of divinity in herbal form for man. 
922 :the sky is your father and the sun is your grandfather. Your nameisSilachi, and you aresister of thedivinities. 
923 :Whoever drinks you lives healthy. You invigorate man's virility. You are the sustainer of people for all times and dispeller of disease. 
924 :You cling and rise by every tree like a loving maiden eager for a lover in marriage. You are Jayanti, covering all over the tree, conquering the disease, Pratyatishthanti, staying strong by the tree, and your name is Sparani. 
925 :Whatever wound is caused by stick, by arrow, by violence or fire, of that you are the cure. O Laksha, cure this man and restore him to health. 
926 :You come from good Bhadra, laksha tree, Ashvattha, Khadira and Dhava, from good banyan and parna, the medicinethat cures wounds and heals bruises. 
927 :Golden in colour, blissful, bright as sun light, good for body's health, when applied to the wound, you heal and heal completely. Indeed, your very name is N ishkrti, the healer, the restorative. 
928 :Laksha, golden hued, auspicious, powerful, hairy chested, you are the sister of waters as cleanser, and Vata, energy, is really your very soul. 
929 :Laksha, silachi by name, refreshing and energetic, your origin is Ajababhru, and you are sprinkled with the showers of the waves of light from the sun which is the child of Yama, lord of the laws of life. 
930 :Arisen from the showers of light from the protent and virile sun, you rest upon the trees as gentle mist, and thence soaring, oozing, trickling, you come to us, the healer, the restorative. 
931 :Vena, lord supreme of existence, first generated and manifested the evolving Prakrti and refulgent forms of existence, existent in their essence since eternity. H e also generated and manifested other spatial forms, reflections of its power, in their own forms and order of law. Thus does the lord generate and manifest the origin of that which has come into existence and that which has not yet come. 
932 :There are those among you who earlier were not wholly self-realised in knowledge and perfect experts in their job, but they did perform certain acts and created certain precedents. Let them and their work not mislead our children and harm our heroes. Therefore I place this knowledge and expertise before you for your guidance. 
933 :In the paradisal bliss of a thousand streams of light and generosity, divine self-realised souls sing and swim in joy, sweet of tongue, mind and will, in tune with the paradisal vision of heavenly light. Here, the instant watchful eyes of the dynamics of divinity, all enveloping and all beholding, are ever awake without a wink for the moment. Binding bonds are there at every step, and there are saviour bridges us well to pass on to the regions of bliss. 
934 :O conqueror of darkness to win the battle for the attainment of food for body, mind and soul, strike off all evil and sin. Conqueror by name and action you are who overcome all jealousy and enmity to cross over the sea and reach the I and of bl i ss. Just as the sun crosses over twelve months of the year and enters the thirteenth month of the home of Indra, so does the human soul cross over the twelve stage-bonds of ten senses, mind and ego and attai ns to the presence of I ndra, the soul's own essential abode, the state of pure Being. 
935 :O soul, by this mantra of action and meditation, attain to your real state of perfection. This is the word of truth in faith. May Soma and Rudra, spirits of divine peace and resolute will and action, strong of arm, unfailing in strike of the target, and commanding commitment and adoration, be herewith us, begracious and lead us to fulfilment. 
936 :win your real state of perfection. This is the word of truth in faith. May Soma and Rudra, spirits of divine peace and resolute will and action, strong of arm, unfailing in strike of the target, and commanding commitment and adoration, be here with us, be gracious and lead us to fulfilment. 
937 :This way you ward off evil with arraignment of their default, and you win your goal. This istheword of truth in faith. May Soma and Rudra, spirits of divine peace and resolute action, strong of arm, unfailing in strike, and commanding commitment and adoration, be here with us, be gracious and lead us to fulfilment. 
938 :O Soma and Rudra, release us from evil and reproach, join and bless our yajna, give us fulfilment with the attainment of immortality. 
939 :power of mantric vengeance, pride of austere ritual, know your limitations. O Agni, light and fire of life, you are the power-strike of power itself, super-thunder over all arms and missiles. May those who wish to malign, strike and torture us be disarmed of their weapons and power. 
940 :O Agni, whoever the wicked person who wants to strike us with the evil eye, evil thought, evil mind, evil resolution, disarm them of their force and power by the strike of your fiery missile. This is our prayer in truth of word, thought and action. 
941 :O lord of life, you are the centre of all power and potential, you are the haven and home of the soul, I come to you, I join your presence with all my faculties, all my people, with all my soul, with all my body and mind, with all that is mine, I surrender to you. 
942 :Centre and source of universal power and potential, you are the ultimate shelter of the soul. I come to you, I join your presence with all my power and property, all my people, all my soul, all my body and mind, with all that is mine, I come. 
943 :You are the ultimate shelter and protection of the soul, I cometoyou, I join your presencewith all my power and potential, all my people, all my soul, all my body and mind, with all that is mine, I come cr^amirr 1 4 g 4^ 4 g P4vi 114 ^4'u.- ggVrrg.- g 4 hgr n ^ ii You are the ultimate shelter and defence for safety and security of the soul. I come to you, I join your presence with all my power and potential, all my people and relationships, all my soul, all my body, mind and senses, with all that is mine, I come. N othing mine is left here. The surrender is complete. 
944 :O miserliness, what is our due, bring us. Stay it not. Do not withhold our share that should be brought. Good bye to the love of desperation. Good bye to adversity. Good bye to illiberality. 
945 :O niggardliness, good bye to the whining person you push up to the front. We offer him salutations to depart. Pray do not i nsult our heart's desi re for I i beral ity and well being. 
946 :May our liberality of mind created and gifted by generous nature and noble people grow and prosper day and night. Therefore we go forward to the uncharitable and say good bye to niggardliness and adversity. 
947 :Coming upto the wealth, honour and excellence of life, we invoke and adore Anumati, good counsel, and Sarasvati, divine mother spirit of knowledge, wisdom and enlightenment. I n the assemblies of noble people on holy occasions, I wish we speak honey sweet language of generosity loved by noble and generous people. 
948 :W hat I pray for, with words of love of the heart full of knowledge and wisdom gifted by divine and generous mother Sarasvati, may my love and faith blest by generous Soma spiritof divinity achievethatwealth, honour and excellence. 
949 :O misery, O adversity, do not shake my words of prayer and dedication of the heart. Do not deprive me of the gifts of Sarasvati. May I ndra and Agni, divine power and light, spirit of confidence and light of wisdom, bring us wealth, honour and excellence. Let all our powers of generosity and love today drive out meanness, misery and niggardliness from our life. 
950 :Get off, adversity. We counter your onslaught right away. I know you are demoralizing, and you pierce at the heart's core, total deprivation as you are. 
951 :Off you, A rati, indigent of mind and niggard at heart, persistently naked and shameless, you seize people in sloth and, by dreams, shake man's resolution of mind and disturb his cherished values to the depths of the heart. 
952 :She, indigent of mind, niggard at heart, voluminous negativity present in all directions of the world, golden-haired love of misers, to that poverty and negativity of spirit, I offer saluatations with the challenge of thunder. 
953 :Shaded in gold, prosperity locked up in golden trappings camouflaged in gold is A rati, spirit of misery and adversity at heart. To her, salutations with the challenge of thunder. 
954 :With sharp and blazing fuel, Agni, ruling power of fire, send noble fighting forces the food and ammunition they need. Let them all be happy here, not wanting anything. Let them all hear my call and come to my yajna. 
955 :O mighty ruler, Indra, pray come, listen to my call. Listen what I am going to do. Let these tempestuous forces of Indra follow my plan and resolution. O Agni, Jataveda, all knowing leader, in command of the dominion, by these plans and forces we shall achieve wondrous victory and advance our power and glory. 
956 :O Devas, noble and positive powers of the world, if that negative, undivine, destructive power wants to attack us from that far off place and destroy our freedom and prosperity, let not Agni, enlightened and fiery leader of humanity, listen to carry out his call and offer, let no good and positive powers listen and go to join him. Let them all come and join my yajnic call for defence of freedom and prosperity of all. 
957 :Come fast, tempestuous forces, rush on forward by the command of Indra, pounce upon the enemy and crush him as a wolf crushes the prey. Let him not get away alive. Take on all his forces too, break down their morale and bind them as prisoners. 
958 :Indra, O ruler, if for our damage, defeat and ignominy, they place a Brahmana in front and press forward, let him be under your foot and I would throw him too unto death. 
959 :And if citizens of the towns come forward, if the enemies turn the holy ones or our own tactics into their defence, using our own land and people as their armour and line of defence, and on top of it all boast of themselves to demoralise us, turn all that to naught. 
960 :which the enemy has done and which he is planning and doing, turn ail those, O destroyer of evil and enmity, against him so that we may destroy all that enemy force. 
961 :Just as Indra, a mighty warrior, seizes a boaster and keeps him under the foot, so must I put them down and keep them under foot for a long long time, thus to exhaust them of their pride and force. 
962 :Here then, O destroyer of evil and enmity, Indra, blazing lustrous hero, fix them unto the vitals of their heart. Here and thus, O ruler and warrior, rule over them. We are your friends. Let us all love and support you. Let us all enjoy your favour and good will. 
963 :Vastu is a house. Vastoshpati is master of the house. The human body is a house (A itareya U panishad. 1, 2 and Atharva-veda 10, 2, 31-32), the soul is the master of this house. And the master has to be its Vastu here may also be interpreted as the house or apartment in which we live with thefamily. The house owner too is the master and protector of the house. 
964 :The body should be healthy for the soul. So too the house should be healthful for the family. And nature is the health-giver to both the body and the home. Vastu in this sukta may be interpreted in both senses, of the body and the home. Reference may also be made to Rgbeda 7, 54 and 55). 
965 :H omage to the sun for health and light, in truth of thought, word and deed in faith. 
966 :Homage to the earth for nourishment and stability, in truth of thought, word and deed in faith. 
967 :Homage to the middle region for health and liberality, in truth of thought, word and deed in faith. 
968 :Homage to the middle region for health and broadness of mind in truth of thought, word and deed H omage to the heavens for health and light in truth of word, thought and deed in faith. 
969 :H omage to the earth for health and patience in truth of thought, word and deed in faith. 
970 :The sun is my eye, wind my prana, vast skies my spirit, earth my body and stability. Unfallen, undefeated, unsurpassed,, free am I, the soul, which I offer and surrender to heaven and earth as to my father and mother for the sake of protection and sustenance. 
971 :M y life of high order, my strength of high order, my work of high order, my duty of high order, my intellect and mind and thought of high order, my sense and judgement of high order, may heaven and earth, both givers of life, both protectors of life, both self- potent, I pray, may protect and promote. May both be my protectors. May both sustain me. May both abide by me with my soul. May the two never hurt me, never forsake me throughout my life in body on earth. 
972 :O mind and soul with perfect faith in Brahma, you are my thunderous shield of defence, whoever the evil man that wants to challenge and enslave me from theeastern direction upfront, lethimfaceand encounter this thunder, and perish. 
973 :O mind and soul with perfect faith in Brahma, you are my thunderous shield of defence. W hoever the evil man that wants to challenge and enslave me from the south direction on the right, let him face and O mind and soul with perfect self-confidence, you are my granite wall of defence. Whoever the evil man that wants to challenge and enslave me from the western direction behind, let him face and encounter this wall, and perish. 
974 :O mind and soul with high morale, you are my thunder shield of defence. Whoever the evil man that wants to challenge and enslave me from the northern direction on the left, let him face and encounter this shield, and perish. 
975 :O mind and soul with self confidence and faith in divinity, you are my bed rock of defence on the earth below. Whoever the fool that is a victim of sin and evil and wants to challenge and enslave me from the lower direction below, let him face and strike his head against O mind and soul with grace from above, you are my thunder-cover of lightning. Whoever the sinner that wants to challenge and enslave me from the direction above, let him face and try to break through this cover, and perish. 
976 :O mind and soul, you are my total cover all round blest by Brahma P raj apati. Whoever or whatever the evil force that wants to attack from anywhere in all quarters of space and tries to subject me to slavery, let it encounter this cover, and perish. 
977 :potential of cosmic mind and Prajapati, I pray for energy of prana and apana from the winds, eye from the sun, ear from space, and body from the earth for the invincible cover of life. With Brhat Saman, we invoke and pray for the Word of Divinity from Mother Sarasvati, inspirer of mind, intellect and soul with knowledge and the strength and power that flows from knowledge. 
978 :This sukta is a monologue. The speaker speaks to himself, speaks to Varuna, and then imagines how Varuna speaks to him. 
979 :Seeker to himself: "What and how have you spoken here of and about and to Varuna, life of life and all protector, universal father that takes away all pain and suffering of life? Mighty refulgent is he, all powerful." Seeker to Varuna: O Varuna, lord of judgement, all protector, constant giver of gifts of earth and nature in life, pray enlighten us, with all the love and care at heart you have for us, about yourself and your divine gifts, constant and incessant as they are." Varuna speaks to the seeker: "Not by mere desire do I become a constant giver. I wish, I watch, I care, I speak and inspire. I inspire and move this earth and heaven, and thus look after the peace and pleasure of life. O seeker, Atharvan, man of wisdom and stable mind, by which power, poetic self-revealing and inspiring in existence, do you grow to be a man of all knowledge? It is by the spirit and poetry of the spirit that is supreme and infinite, all comprehensive and protective, that you grow all knowing. Know that and you know all. 
980 :"True it is I am deep and serious, unfathomable, unknowable beyond thought and words. I am all wise and omniscient by virtue of the true wisdom of the poetry of existence and all that is in existence itself. Neither the noble nor the ignoble with all their power and potential can ever comprehend the law and discipline which I ordain and sustain." The seeker's homage to Varuna: "Yes, O lord, none other than you is superior either by knowledge and wisdom nor by intelligence and awareness, nor is anyone more patient and steadfast. O Varuna, you alone are lord of your own essential power. You alone know, wield and sustain all regions of the universe. Surely, even the man who commands wondrous powers feels over-awed by your infinite power. 
981 :"O lord of darling love and glory, self-potent leader and guide of the universe, you know the birth and age of all creatures of the universe. Pray, what is there anything beyond this expansive space? O lord of wisdom and immortality, is there anything closer this side of that farthest reality?" Varuna speaks to the seeker: "Of that, I, all knowing Varuna, speak to you. There is one beyond this dynamic expansive universe, that is the transcendent Parama B rahma, and this side of that also, there is one, indestructible, that is Prakrti in the essence. Let the stingy misers be down, poor of speech below the state of knowledge, and let the negatives too creep upon the surface of the earth, never higher than the grass." The seeker: "O loving lord of generosity, you yourself say that often many evils creep into the life of those who repeatedly rise to prosperity. Let no such adversity overtake such people of sterile mind. Pray be not too kind to them also, but save them all the same from their sterility. Let not people say that you are unkind." Varuna's blessing: "O seeker, O celebrant, people would not say I am unkind and ungenerous. I give you all the gifts of the earth and nature without a break. Among all human communities over the earth in all directions, with your powers and potentials, with all your holy actions, come and live by songs of universal wisdom and divine celebration I give you. (This is the filial bond between you and me.)" The celebrant's prayer: "O Lord Varuna, may the songs of your celebration rise and ring across the quarters of space over the earth among all the people of humanity. Pray bless me with that which is yet wanting in me and which I must attain. You are my friend, my inalienable companion attainable over seven steps of theVyahrtis: Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, Maha, Jana, tapa and Satyam. 
982 :"O Varuna, our kinship and fraternity is equal and constant, our nature and manifestation in the world is equal and constant. I also know how this kinship and nature is equal and constant. I now offer and surrender to you what I have not so far offered and surrendered to you. I am a companion, with you and at your service. I am yourfriend and I would join you at seven steps from here. 
983 :"O Varuna, lord of your own divine power, you are brilliantly generous for the generous, giver of health and long age for the celebrant, vibrant energy for the faithful, giver of intelligence for the worshipper. You raise the constant devotee to be a father figure and a brother of the divines. Pray create and give excellent wealth and honour for him. Our friend you are for us the brother highest." This sukta is common to Rgveda (10, 110) Y aj urveda (29) and A tharva-veda. J ataveda i s the home- fire, yajna-fire, master of the home and the soul in the body. Each mantra can be interpreted differently in these different contexts. 
984 :O Jataveda, lighted today in the man's home, you are brilliant and generous. You invoke, join and serve the brilliant powers of nature and humanity. Friend of the highest refulgent order, pray bring in the divines, communicate and create with them. You are master of information and knowledge, refined manager, poetic creator and wide awake in the life around. 
985 :M aintaining the body beyond fear and fall, holy and sophisticated of speech and taste, sprinkle the paths of truth worth following with honey sweets of culture and creativity, enjoy them and lead on others to enjoy them and follow. Energising and elevating thoughts and yajnic meets with a high order of knowledge and action, raise the yajnic order and accomplish and fulfil this programme of love, non-violence and service worthy of the divines. 
986 :Giving the clarion call for collective creative action with the spirit of yajna, Agni, worthy of praise and adoration, come with honour, excellence and vibrant energies of life. You are harbinger and inspirer of divinities, great and powerful, worthy of love, association and leadership, inspired with a mission, pray bring in and join all these divine forces together and lead them on to create a higher order of life. 
987 :Just as in the early part of the day, at dawn, holy grass, old and ancient is gathered from various quarters of the earth to cover the vedi and is spread on the east, and this seat is good and comfortable for the sages to sit on and meditate freely, so does the sun rise warm and comfortable to cover the earth with light from the east, and so does the presence of B rahma al l-pervasive and collected from nature arise on the vedi at dawn for the sages to meditate and so does it expand in their consciousness for their good. 
988 :Just as youthful women wax at heart with love for their husbands, so may the holy doors of the vedi be wide open, expansive, gracious and welcoming for the sages to come in and participate in the yajna. 
989 :Let the day and night, graciously associated together, both adorable, abiding by the sun, their common progenitor, be present and bless the home. Similarly, let the man and wife, both divineand youthful, broad at heart, holy and brilliant, bearing grace and creative sanctity, abide by the holiness of the home and family as the divine foundation of their togetherness in love. 
990 :Two divine high priests of first order of eminence, experts of the language of science and social policy, masters of measurement and design, construction and extension of the human yajna of mutual cooperati on and development, inspiring and pressing forward in plans, projects and programmes of social development, experts in theory and practice, speculation and realistic imagination, dedicated to the eternal light of Vedic values and pointing forward to wide and open-ended progress should lead the nation of humanity like Agni and Aditya, light and leadership in complementarity. 
991 :LetBharati, spirit and language of the land, Ida, vision and word of eternity in the version of human consciousness, giver of enlightenment, and Sarasvati, perennial stream of know I edge and grace, all these three divinities, noble of thought, intention and action, come upon the instant, come and bless us. 
992 :O yajamana, inspired and adorable man blest with knowledge, invoke, join and worshipTvashta, that self-refulgent creator and maker of forms here in the evolution of life, who creates both these mother powers of generation, heaven and earth, and beautifies all O yajamana, sincerely preparing and seasoning the food and fragrances for the divinities according to the seasons offer it into thevedi and pray may Vanaspati, lord of herbs, the spirit of nature at peace, the sun and Agni enjoy the holy offerings and bless the greens with ghrta and honey sweets. 
993 :Agni, refulgent deity of yajna, instantly and always rising, accomplishes the yajna and thereby becomes pioneer of divine powers. Thereby, may the divinities receive and consume the food offered into the fire within the noble yajamana's discipline of the law and language of truth and yajna with the spirit of total surrender. 
994 :Varuna, brilliant physician with his knowledge of sun and water, has given me the knowledge of snake poison cure. With unfailing words of that knowledge I remove your poison. W hether the wound and poison is deep or shallow or superficial, I seize your poison and make it disappear just as water disappears in sand in the desert. 
995 :Your poison that is dehydrating and burning the blood in the blood vessels, I seize and draw out. I draw out your poison which may be of medium, high or low intensity and which must disappear by the force of the antidote. 
996 :M y word is mighty and virile like thunder of the cloud. With that powerful word, I stop and drive out you and your poison. With the help of men I have seized and dispelled the effective spirit of the poison as light removes the darkness and the light of the patient's life would rise like the sun at dawn. 
997 :I destroy your eye power with the eye. By poison I destroy your poison. Die off, O snake, do not remain alive. Let the poison go back to you. 
998 :O deadly forest snake, O spotted one, O grass snake, O brown, O black one, O hooded cobras, do not stay around my friend's house. Hissing and hearing my word of terror, stay out and be all with your poison by yourselves. 
999 :A s we loosen the string of a bow or bonds of a chariot so do I slacken and remove the deadly poison of the black, marshy, brown, off-water and all subduing snake. 
1000 :We know the stickers and burrowers, nonstickers, males and females, and all their different classes in every way. They are non-poisonous. What harm can they do? The young female snake born of the deadly black snake is highly dangerous. Let the poison of all such snakes which cause skin eruptions be reversed and rendered totally ineffective. 
1001 :The porcupinewith earsfound in the valley said thus: Let the poison of these creatures which live in burrows be the most ineffective. 
1002 :Tabuva snake is like Tabuva, the antidote of poison. O Tabuva, you are surely not the destroyer. You are the antidote that renders snake-poison ineffective. 
1003 :Tastuva snake is likeTastuva, antidote of poison. But, O Tastuva, you are surely not the destroyer. You are the antidote that renders snake poison ineffective. 
1004 :Note: This hymn should be read with Rgveda 1,191, where various kinds of snakes and many other poisonous creatures are mentioned along with many herbs and bird antidotes. Here also some antidotes are mentioned specially in mantras 1O and 11. There are many stories, reports and direct experiences of miraculous cures of poison in India. Snake poison is cured with snake poison itself. 'Poison kills poison.' This is a hymn of antidote to evil and deeds of violence. 
1005 :O Oshadhi, antidote to evil and violence, the man of eagle imagination envisioned you and the man of boarlike tenancity dug you out of oblivion. Destroy the evil deed, send back the evil to the evil doer. 
1006 :Throw out the saboteurs, destroy the evil deeds. Oshadhi, O antidote of violence, whoever wants to injure, terrorize or destroy us, let the evil visit on him. 
1007 :O men of wisdom, like the barbed girdle of a violent animal round his body, having turned the evil man's deed into a golden necklace for him in return for his deed, send it back to him as a barbed leash for him. 
1008 :And also, having caught up the evil deed in hand, send it back in this way: Put it right in front of him so that he face it himself and it may, by itself, destroy him. 
1009 :Let the deeds be for the doers: good for the good, evil for the evil. Likewise, let inprecations be for the imprecators. Like a perfectly designed comfortable chariot, let evil deeds come back to the evil doer. 
1010 :If a woman or man does the evil deed for the satisfaction of his evil mind, the same deed we lead unto the doer like a horse by the halter. 
1011 :O misfortune, whether you are brought on as an accident of nature or caused by humans, we counter you by the help of Indra, lord omnipotent and our own self-confidence, our inalienable friend and ally. 
1012 :O Agni, refulgent ruler, leader and commander, fighter and victor of battles, face and fight the battles against misfortune. With our powers of defence and offence we counter and turn evil and violence back to the evil doer. 
1013 :O destroyer of the perpetrator of evil and violence, punish that who commits evil and violence, eliminate him for sure, only him, for we do not arouse you to smite him that does no evil. 
1014 :like a son to the father and, like a bruised viper, grip and bite him. Go like one broke loose of all bonds, go back to the evil doer again. 
1015 :Let the evil deed turn upon the perpetrator like a doe at bay, a female elephant or a tigress pouncing upon the hunter. 
1016 :O heaven and earth, let the evil deed turn and fall back upon the evil doer fast and straight like an arrow and seize him like a tiger seizing its prey. 
1017 :Let the deed turn and come back upon the doer like a smoothly moving chariot, punitive like fire to the evil doer, and favourable and cool like water to the person who does good. 
1018 :O Oshadhi, herbs and trees, cleansers of pollution and disease, sages and scholars, fiery spirits of life, embodiments of beauty and sweetness, pleasure and passion, life energies and divinities of existence, gifts of Vishnu and Prajapati, all born of the truth and law of existence, observers of the laws of life, creators of the honey sweets of life, let there be one or ten, any number of distractors, abusers and revilers, create for us the honey sweets of good health and happy life. 
1019 :O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of the honey sweets of life, let there be two or twenty, any number of distractors, abusers and revilers, create for us the honey sweets of life and joy in spite of them, two, and even twenty may they be. 
1020 :O O shad hi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of the honey sweets of life, let there be three or thirty, any number of distractors, abusers, revilers or spoilers of health and happiness, three, and even thirty let them be, create for us the honey sweets of life and joy in spite of them. 
1021 :O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of honey sweets, let there be four or forty, any number of polluters, abusers and revilers of health and happiness, four, and even forty may be, create for us the honey sweets of life and joy in spite of them. 
1022 :Let there be five, and even fifty abusers and revilers of life against me, O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of honey sweets of life and health, create for us the honey sweets of life. 
1023 :Let there be six, and even sixty abusers and reviiers of life against me, O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of the honey sweets of life and health, create for us the honey sweets of life. 
1024 :Let there be seven, and even seventy abusers and reviiers of life against me, O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of the honey sweets of life and health, create for us the honey sweets of life. 
1025 :Let there be eight, and even eighty abusers and reviiers of life against me, O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of the honey sweets of life and health, create for us the honey sweets of life. 
1026 :Let there be nine, and even ninety reviiers of life against me, O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of honey sweets, create for us the honey sweets of life. 
1027 :Let there be ten, and even hundred reviiers of life against me, O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life, creator of the honey sweets of life and health, create for us the honey sweets of life. 
1028 :Let there be hundred, and even thousand abusers and reviiers of life and truth ranged against me, O Oshadhi, born of the truth and law of existence, observer of the laws of life without relent, creator of the beauty and honey sweets of life and health, create for us the honey sweets of life and strength to stand by truth against a thousand odds. 
1029 :If you are your sole strength, the virile spirit, then create something as your contribution to life. Otherwise you are as good as lifeless. 
1030 :If you are strong with two, yourself and the spirit of divinity, create and contribute, otherwise be lifeless. 
1031 :If you are strong with three, command sattva, rajas and tamas modes of Prakrti in thought, energy and materiality, create and contribute something to the world, otherwise be good for nothing. 
1032 :If you are strong and virile with four, Dharma, Artha, Kama and for Moksha, create and contribute something to life, otherwise miss the joy of living. 
1033 :If you are strong with five, five elements, five senses, five pranas, do something, create, otherwise you would be as good as lifeless. 
1034 :If you are strong and virile with six, cotrol over desire, anger, greed, fascination, arrogance and pride, c reate a n d c o ntri b ute so m eth i n g to th e w o rI d, oth erw i se your life is a waste. 
1035 :If you are strong and virile with seven, five senses, mind and intelligence, create and contribute something to the world, or stay unfruitful. 
1036 :If you are strong and virile with eight, the eightfold path of the good life, be creative, or lifewould be dull and fruitless. 
1037 :If you are strong and virile with nine, nine forms of wealth gifted by Lakshmi, create and contribute something positive to life, otherwise be void of the real pleasure of life. 
1038 :If you are strong and virile with ten, wealth, morals, forgiveness, courage, concentration, intelligence, assistants, skill, forces, knowledge, create and contribute to life and the environment, otherwise your life would be just barren, nothing more. 
1039 :If you are the eleventh, none of these ten, you would be either wholly and irredeemably dry, unconsecrated by the holy waters of life. A nd if you are free from all these ten, pure spirit in Kaivalyastate, then you are untouched by all pleasure and pain of the waters of life. 
1040 :Note: The numbers from one to ten are statements of the virtues, assets and values of life. They can be interpreted in different ways: ten principles of Dharma, ten pranas, ten senses of perception and volition and so on. But the emphasis is on creative life. We must create and contribute something to life and leave it richer than wefound itwhen we came. Creativity isthe value, selfishness and sterility is no life. Either be in and doing, or out and free. 
1041 :The theme of this hymn i s B rahma-J aya, the J aya of eternal Brahma, the Creator. 
1042 :and thus finds self-expression and self-fulfilment. Ordinarily it means wife. Husband and wife both find fulfilment of their conjugal life through the birth of progeny. The husband cannot find this fulfilment except through the wife. So the wife is Jaya. In the cosmic context, Brahma being the creator, He creates through Prakrti, Nature. So Prakrti is Jaya (Brhadaranya- kopanishad, 1, 4,17. 
1043 :But natural creation is not the all of divine creation. The Vedic voice too is the self-expression of divine omniscient consciousness. Thus Vedic voice too is Jaya. Seven mantras of this hymn (1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 1O and 11) are the same as Rgveda 10,109,1-7.1 n mantra 5, Brahma jaya is compared to "J uhu', theyajna ladle. Sayana in his commentary on Rgveda interprets J uhu as Brahma-vadini, self-expressive voice of Brahma. ThusJ aya in this hymn is the Divine Voice. 
1044 :The Voice is I la in the absolute sense, Sarasvati in the existential sense of the cosmic flow, and M ahi or Bharati in the local context of the global sense. 
1045 :In the beginning, to express and reveal the joyous manifestation (Leela) of the creativity of Supreme B rahma, those first borns of the dynamics of divine law, A kupara, boundless light principle or A ditya Rshi, Salila, liquid principle or A ngira Rshi, M atari shva, energy principle or Vayu Rshi, and Viduhara, fiery principle or Agni Rshi, all like yajna fire, burning and creative, illustrious, soothing,flowing, divinesoulsand spirits, express and reveal the divine voice of the Veda. (The voice they reveal is I la.) (The word Kilvisham has been interpreted in two senses: joyous expression as above, and sinful violation. As joyous expression we have the divine Veda through the voice of nature and the voice of the Rshis. 
1046 :If the word is interpreted in the sense of sinful violation, then on violation of the divine voice by humanity, and on violence against nature's beauty and creativity by human pride and ambition for power and luxury, the forces of nature and divine souls in humanity would raise their voice of protest. 
1047 :The result of the joyous voice is happiness, and the result of the voice of protest is bound to be suffering. At the level of comparative literature, especially for Christian readers, we may refer to the Bibical story of creation: When humanity in Paradise violated thedivine commandment then: Both Nature and the Divine Voice are Brahma Jaya. Violence against Nature and the Divine Voice is violence against the creator.) Soma, the ruling spiritof life, all at peace, having first received the divine Word, gives it on to the sage Brahma in the Sarasvati form. Varuna, the sage of judgement, M itra, the sage with love, follow, and Agni, dedicated to yajnafire, holds it by hand as in theyajnic ladle and leads it on. 
1048 :The received form of this divine Vak is to be practically received by hard discipline, as the ladle is to beheld carefully by hand. "This is the child of heaven", this having been said, "this is not to be communicated to the wastour, violator or a mere agent," this is an important injunction. It does not wait for any one, nor does it stand still, it moves on. Its meaning is hidden like the state of a ruler's dominion. The social order of the Kshatriya who holds it sacred stays protected and unviolable. 
1049 :If Brahma Jaya, Voice Divine, which they say is the saviour of life and free from all bounds, is described as harbinger of calamities befalling human habitations, then it destroys that social order and there meteors of fire and misfortune fall like stars void of light. 
1050 :The B rahmachari, seeker of B rahma, dedicated to this sublime subject goes on pursuing the divine voice and, internalising it, becomes one of the devas in the presence of nature and the scholars. He becomes a Brhaspati. And thus, O sages, the scholar obtains the Word and, at the end of education, the wedded wife too, escorted to him by the blissful Somaic high priest and preceptor I ike the ] uhu, ghrta ladle for life's yajna. 
1051 :The divinities of eternal time and seven ancient sages who sit down for tapas and cosmic yajna speak of this Voice of Divinity and communicate it. Mighty, even dreadful, is this voice of Brahma, now residing at heart with the Brahmana, the sagely scholar, and if it is abducted and exploited by clever people, it destroys even the best system of human governance. This mighty voice, B rahma holds in the highest heaven and the sage serves in his highest spirit and intelligence. 
1052 :W here those fall from duty who hold the Word and nature in trust, where the reality of life is concealed in camouflage and sanctity is desecrated, where the brave engage in deadly fight over trivialities, there the BrahmaJ aya, theWord of Divinity and Spirit of Nature destroys the guilty and eliminates all negation. 
1053 :Where ten self-proclaimed guardians of Brahma Jaya, all impostors at heart, claim dominion over the divine trust of nature and humanity against one real enlightened sage dedicated to Brahma and the wisdom of eternity, the one deserves to hold the trust in hand with sole authority. 
1054 :Only the Brahmana, enlightened sage wholly dedicated to Brahma, the Vedic Word, Nature and humanity, and the eternal values without compromise for any reason whatsoever, is the guardian of Brahma Jaya, neither the Kshatriya nor the Vaishya (because the Kshatriya and the Vaishya, occupied, if not preoccupied, with political and economic pressures and problems, are likely to compromise in the interest of survival). Thus says the Sun to and for all the five people as it moves on revealing every thing in its reality. So says Brahma itself which is the all immanent light of life. 
1055 :N obleteachers and scholars continuously go on teaching and advancing the Vedic voice, and noble people conduct the yajnic programmes of education. Rulers and brilliant men of knowledge and generous disposition serving the divine truth with dedication carry on the propagation of the holy Word and its extension in practice and application. 
1056 :Thus do sages, scholars and noble people, serving and spreading the light of divine knowledge, and the Vedic Word, sanctified and energised for life's purity, excellence and joy by Devas, serve Brahma, Lord Supreme, in order that they may enjoy and extend the wealth and creativity of mother earth and the environment. 
1057 :In the Rashtra, order of governance, where by error or ignorance Brahma Jaya, the Word of divinity and the voice of the B rahma, is suppressed, the women and the mother spirit of the nation's creativity shall find no peace and prestige either in the day or at night although they are auspicious harbingers of a hundred gifts and advantages for the nation. 
1058 :Neither the man of versatile learning and objective understanding nor the man of high intelligence and broad mind arises in the homes of that Rashtra where either by error or by ignorance the vision and Word of divine values and voice of the B rahmana is suppressed. 
1059 :Nor does the citizen, guardian, creative artist or even the border watch of the nation go forward with pride of the nation's power and prosperity if in the nation the vision and Word of divinity and the Brahmana's voice is suppressed for reasons of error and ignorance. 
1060 :Nor does the brilliant beam of the nation's chariot with shade of rich green all round the helm and steer of the Rashtra meet with any recognition of its grandeur, if in that nation the Word of divinity and voice of the B rahmana is suppressed by error and ignorance. 
1061 :No greenery waves in the field, no lotus blooms in the lake, the fruit forsakes the tree, and the shoot withers on the branch in the Rashtra in which the Word of Divinity and the Brahmana's voice is suppressed on account of error, ignorance, arrogance and pride. 
1062 :Those who love, live by and pray for the gifts of mother earth and nature fail to receive the bounties of the earth and the sky for the ruler and the Rashtra in which mindlessly the divine Word and the Brahmana's voice is suppressed. 
1063 :The auspicious and abundant mother cow goes dry of milk, the mighty bull refuses to bear the yoke of the master in the Rashtra where the B rahmana is denied access to divine knowledge and passes the night in discomfort for fear of political offence. 
1064 :O ruler of the people, the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity did not give this earth, this Vedic speech, this holy cow to you to eat, i.e., for exploitation, misappropriation and personal consumption. Do not try to eat up the Brahmana's cow, it is inviolable, it is not something edible. It is not to be killed. 
1065 :(B rahmana in this hymn does not mean a caste, it means Brahma, the Supreme Being and any person wholly dedicated to Brahma. 'Gau' means the cow and all divine gifts of Brahma: nature, sun rays, moon, land, earth and the environment, the people, knowledge, culture, language, sense organs and, of course, the cow and all other useful animals. AII these belong to Brahma, all these belong to humanity as trust, and humanity is to be taken as noble on its own as humanity. These do not belong to any particular person even if the person is a ruler. They belong to all and to every person as a trust. 
1066 :I n this sense they belong to the ruler also but as a trustee of the people, not as a person, not as property. Hence the original term 'Brahmana's Gau' is used in the translation in this wide sense. Every person's share of God's gifts is sacred, inviolable, un-encroachable.) If the ruler of the people is sinful, spiritually broken by sensual indulgence, creates hate and division among people for personal gain and gambles with their interests, and if he violates the Brahmana's Cow, then he may last for today but not tomorrow. Tomorrow he must go. 
1067 :O Ruler, this Brahmana's Cow for the selfish is like a deadly poisonous snake wrapped in cow's form, poised against the sinful, thirsty, ready to strike. Don't touch it, it is inviolable, never never to be hurt, killed and eaten. (It is not food, it is the giver of food.) The ruler who takes the Brahmana only for a morsel of food is like a drunkard taking a draught of cobra poison for drink which ruins the dominion, darkens his splendour and, like lighted fire rising to a blaze, shakes everything and reduces him to naught. 
1068 :He that violates the Brahmana, suppresses his freedom of speech and kills his Brahma Cow, believing that he is soft and brittle as a piece of clay, is a reviler of divinities, lost in greed for material wealth, having lost his sense and mind. Omni potent I ndra sets his heart and soul on fire as he moves around hated of both heaven and earth. 
1069 :Brahmana,theman of Brahma, is inviolable like the vitality of one's own body. Like the vital heat of one's own body he is the vital fire of the body politic. Soma, lord of universal peace and joy, is his kinsman and I ndra, lord omnipotent, is his protector against calumny and violence. 
1070 :Thefood of the man of dirty mind, who violates the peace and freedom of the Brahmanas and eats up their share of life and sustenance feeling that it tastes really sweet, is bitter, he takes up a morsel of hundred barbs which he can neither swallow nor throw out. 
1071 :The B rahmana's tongue becomes the bow stri ng, his speech, the arrow head, his throat and teeth, the shaft and tips of the arrow tempered with fire. With these forces of the mind for bow and arrow initiated and accelerated by the divinities, B rahma takes up the bow and shoots the revilers of divinity. 
1072 :Wielding bows and arrows of sharp and tempered mind, poised to strike, when the Brahmanas shoot out a volley of words and ideas, the attack is not ineffectual. With the force of austere discipline and righteous passion, they pursue, strike and fell this target, the reviler of divinity and divine values, even from a far off distance. 
1073 :The revilers of divinity who may shine and blaze and rule a thousand ways of strength and prosperity, who may be in tens, hundreds or even thousands well provided with yajnic materials, yet having violated and eaten up the Brahmana's Cow, they become self- deprived and fall exhausted and defeated. 
1074 :The Brahmana's Cow, when it is hurt, violated, suppressed and devoured, destroys those exploiters of yajnic materials who violate even the eternal vision and voice of the highest spirit and awareness present in the soul—which otherwise leads to the ultimate freedom of M oksha. 
1075 :Full hundred and one were those whom the earth had shaken with all their power and potential. For, having suppressed the people and thus having violated the sanctity of Brahma's Cow, they too fell defeated beyond all possible hope of recovery. 
1076 :Thereviler of divinity moves among the mortals but only as a bagful of poison and a structure of blood and bone. A ny one who hurts, suppresses, violates and thus kills a Brahmana, brother of divinities, failsto reach even the fringe of average house holder's peace and joy by the paths of his forefathers. 
1077 :Agni, the light and fire of life, is our guide and pioneer, Soma, moon-like spirit of beauty, peace and joy is our kinsman, brother and gracious giver, and Indra, lord of omnipotence, is the destroyer of the reviler, maligner and scandaliser. This, the wise say and tell us. 
1078 :O ruler of the people, O protector of the nation's Cow, like an arrow tempered in fire with poison, deadly like the strike of the cobra is the voice and piety of the Brahmana, if violated, and that is the fatal strike of his blow. With that arrow the Brahmana fixes and fells the violators of life's sanctity, suppressors of freedom and piety, and challengers of the servants of Divinity. 
1079 :(Brahmana's 'Cow', thus, is nota mere animal. It is the spirit and culture of humanity, it is the soul and sanctity of Nature, and it is the will and command of Divinity. To serve it means the invitation to life, to challenge it means the call for death.) Having conquered all adversaries, the A suras, natural men, rise too high, so high they almost touch the skies. Yet even being the sole victors, they hurt, violate and desecrate Bhrgu, brilliant Brahmana dedicated to Divinity, and themselves consume the food and fragrances meant for yajna. Thankless, guilty of hubris, they fall self-defeated. 
1080 :Those people who reject, violate and desecrate the Angiras, servant of Divinity dear as breath of life and brilliant as blazing embers, dedicated to Brhat Samans, songs of the Lord, lose all: the Lord all protector, destroyer of evil stalls their growth and holds their future possibilities in the jaws of retribution. 
1081 :Those who hate and desecratetheBrahmanaand oppress him with exorbitant taxes or deprive him of his righful share tear their hair in pain of guilt in the midst of a stream of blood. 
1082 :When the Brahmana's Cow, sacred freedom of thought, speech and action, violated, suppressed and bruised, flutters around but in pain of death, it destroys the lustre and grandeur of the Rashtra, grand social order, and no generous, virile heroes arise there any more. 
1083 :M utilation of the B rahmana's cow, his freedom and fearlessness, isan act of dire cruelty, rough handling of his voice is frightful, and if you scoff at his opinions, like making fun of his Cow's milk, by implication, even that is a sin among the veterans of the Rashtra. 
1084 :A mighty ruler, arrogant and proud of himself who violates and tries to suppress the Brahmana asks for ruin. Drained of its vitality and power is that Rashtra where the Brahmana is suppressed and over-ruled. 
1085 :TheBrahmana'sCow is powerful and versatile: It has eight legs, no one can dislodge it. It has four eyes, nothing can escape its notice. It has four ears, none can whisper sedition. It has four jaws, it can crush injustice with double strength. It has two mouths and two tongues, it can consume both pleasure and pain and speak of both human and divine matters. Being so versatile it can shake up any social order that seeks to suppress it. It can thus also raise any social order that honours it. 
1086 :(This mantra specially shows that the Cow is not the cow that gives milk for life, it is that holy vision, knowledge, ethics and policy of state governance which provides for a healthy, prosperous and enlightened living order which is the ideal of an organised society.) As flood water rushes into a leaking boat and the boat sinks, so do evils and calamities creep in and destroy the Rashtra where arrogant, ruling powers violate the Brahmana and reject his vision and wisdom. 
1087 :Even trees repel him from their shade saying, "Do not come into the shade". O Narada, enlightened giver of shelter and knowledge to men, whoever appropriates the holy wealth of the Brahmana taking it as his own, is so contemptible. 
1088 :The omnipotent ruler of the world, Varuna, all protector, has said and ordained thus: O man, this Brahmana's Cow is virtual poison created by divinities for the unholy. Having eaten of this Brahmana's Cow, no one can live and keep awake in the Rashtra. 
1089 :Let them be nine and ninety so powerful that they can shake the globe. Y et, havi ng violated the wi shes and interests of the holy Brahmanic people, they would face defeat and fall beyond all possible recovery. 
1090 :That bunch of thorns which people bind after the dead to efface the footsteps, O violator and desecrator of Brahmana, that be your bed: so say the wise and the divines. 
1091 :O violator and oppressor of Brahmana, those tears of the poor, helpless, broken man that flow incessantly, that flow, the Devas have ordained as your share of the drink in life. 
1092 :O violator and oppressor of Brahmana, that water with which they give the funeral bath to the dead, with which they soak and soften the beard and moustache, that water, the D evas have ordai ned as your share of water in life. 
1093 :The rain that M itra and Varuna, divine sun and air, shower on all, they do not shower on the oppressor of the Brahmana. The Council of the Nation accepts him not, nor does it bring him to success. And he has no love for a friend, nor friend for him. 
1094 :The booming war drum made with wood and headed with skin roars like a warrior. O heroic warrior, proclaiming dire conflict of battle, challenging adversaries, waxing victorious as a lion, keep on thundering on way to victory with hope and ambition. 
1095 :The war drum stretched and tightened on the wooden frame roars like a lion, advances like a bellowing bull upon the cow. O heroic warrior, down and broken are your adversaries, and your strength is shattering awful for the enemies like the terror of Indra upon the cloud. 
1096 :O warrior, like a lustrous hero, pouncing upon the enemy hoard in full knowledge, well known ambitiousfor land and victory, roar as terror and advance for the conquest. Strike the heart of enemies with fear and dismay and let them flee having I eft their field and positions, tumbling in panic. 
1097 :O warrior, loud and roaring, winning your battles, collecting your prizes, go on, watch all round. Let the war drum proclaim the divine victory loud and bold, go forward and disarm the enemies of all their power and force. 
1098 :Let the poor defenceless woman awakened and fear stricken by the loud roar of the war drum rumbling around and high take up the child of the fallen enemy in hand and run for safety and shetter. 
1099 :O war drum, you are the first to send out the proclamation of battle. O heroic warrior and commander, inspired and exhilarated, brave and brilliant, hereon this battlefield on earth, give the word of command. O declarant and commander, breaking through the enemy lines, proclaim the word of truth and right. 
1100 :Let the boom of the drum rise from earth to heaven and let the words and waves of your command instantly ring in the middle spaces. Roar and thunder, rising, resounding, celebrated and advancing for the destruction of enemy forces. 
1101 :Speak the words of a language created and framed by careful thought, reflection and practical sagacity, raise, calibrate and energise the weapons of the brave. O friend and ally of I ndra, mighty ruler, give the clarion call to thewarriors, raise the forces of friends and destroy the enemies. 
1102 :A balanced thinker and speaker with confident assertion, commanding power and prestige, dedicated to wisdom and common good, freely communicative with country people, anxious for good results for all, and well knowing the rules, laws and ways of the world : such an ambassador between two countries brings honour and fame for all even in a situation of conflict. 
1103 :O vision, word and voice of life and the nation, lover and harbinger of well being, creator and winner of wealth and peace, patient and courageous, victor of the battles of life, you are trained and refined by the wisdom ofVeda.Just as the soma makers grind the soma filaments to fineness, just as a settled sage and scholar analyses subtle ideas in philosophy, you in life's struggles, acquiring lands and culture of the wealth and wisdom of life, rejoice yourself to the full. 
1104 :O vision, word and voice of the nation, winner of enemies, always the victor, controller of adversaries, seeker of lands, cows and culture, patient and challenging, breaker of rigidities, letyourword resound with sense and power like the seer's vision of mantra, and raise the clarion call for the growth of food, energy and knowledge for winning the battles of life. 
1105 :Shaker of the unshaken, joyous, most dynamic, winner of battles, leading pioneer, unchallengeable, protected favourite of Indra, the ruler, well versed in yajnic programmes, breaker of the courage and morale of adversaries, O leading voice of the nation, pray come forthwith and guide us to our goals through the battle ranks of life. 
1106 :Note: This Sukta is not a song of warmongering, it is a song of struggle and exhortation to realise our aims of higher living with freedom at individual as well as collective living within the laws of natural and social dynamics. Life is a struggle, and to rise we have to fight against our limitations, weaknesses and negativities, which, added to external pressures, are our enemies. We must challenge these with self-confidence for victory, and this challenging struggle for victory is the theme. 
1107 :Clarion call of the united people for progressive action, strike confusion of heart and mind among unfriendly forces. Let us create dissension, confusion and fear among the adversaries. O united voice of the people, strike down all such conflicts and divisions. 
1108 :(This sukta may better be read with the Iast hymn of Rgveda (10, 191) on the unity of humanity living together in harmony with united thought and action as onefamily of one universal God of love and compassion for all.) Let the unfriendly elements shaken at heart and mind, their eyes dazzled, flee with fear and panic when the battle call is given and the oblation has been offered into the fire. 
1109 :O call for war of the united people symbolised by the war drum made of wood and equipped with tight leather and straps, anointed with ghrta, representing people of all communities, let the boom resound as warning of terror for unfriendly forces. 
1110 :Just as forest deer fear the hunter and shake with fright, so, O call of the drum, resound to the unfriendly forces, strike their mind with awe and paralyse their will. 
1111 :Just as sheep and goats struck w ith fear fI ee from the wolf, so, O call of the drum, roar and resound to the enemies, frighten their mind and paralyse their will. 
1112 :animals day in and day out fear the lion's roar, so, O call of the drum, roar and resound to the enemies, frighten their mind and paralyse their will. 
1113 :Let all the noble and brilliant leaders and warriors who rule and control the affairs of war and defence keep the enemies away by fear of the boom of the drum with the beat on the tympanic membrane of dear skin. 
1114 :By the tumult of the thumping boots of our soldiers on the march with air and armour cover with which Indra, ruler and commander, plays the war game to win, let our enemies have the fright of their life while they form and stand in battle array. 
1115 :Let the twangs of bow strings and boom of the drums roar and resound in the quarters of space while the enemy forces in battle may retreat, defeated, line by line. 
1116 :O Aditya, blazing commandar, dazzle the enemy's eyes to blindness, rush on upon the enemy like lazer beams, and when the enemies have lost their strength of arms, let them betaken with bonds of fetters on the legs. 
1117 :O lustrous warriors, stormy children of theearth, joining Indra, destroy the enemies. Soma lord of peace istheruler, Varuna, lord of justiceistheruler, M ahadeva, lord supreme, is the ruler, and Indra, lord omnipotent is the ruler, dispenser of death and life. 
1118 :These dedicated God fearing forces with solar banner, one and equal of mind with God's grace would win over the enemies. This is the voice of the soul in truth of thought, word and deed. 
1119 :May the yajna fire, soma herb, grava, the soma crush, the cloud, Varuna, pure water, the yajna vedi, the holy grass, all bright and pure in strength, join to give us good health and thus keep away all physical and mental negativities. 
1120 :This fever which reduces all to pallor, consuming them like fire with high temperature, may, with treatment, lose its intensity, go down to normal and disappear for all time. 
1121 :The fever which affects every joint and arises from weakness of joints gives redness as fire, the skin sprinkled, as if, with red spots. O Vishvadhavirya herb, bring it down and remove it far off from the patient. 
1122 :O fever, having done the treatment with proper medicines, I reduce your intensity to normal temperature. Beating and pounding with fistforceeven the strong ones, fever affects even the very strong persons and spreads often in the areas of heavy rains. 
1123 :It spreads in areas of munja grass. Its place is the areas of heavy rains. Ever since it has arisen, it has been observed in troublesome areas of the strong. 
1124 :dangerous as it is, it should be eliminated. It affects the female mosquito and on it it strikes its forceful onslaught. 
1125 :Takman fever spreads in grassy and bushy places. It affects the far off oppressive areas. It affects the weaker sections of the community moving around and gives them body shivers all over. 
1126 :G o far to rainy areas, to grassy areas, and destroy your own species. These are the breeding areas we say, and others also can be. 
1127 :The fever does not affect other bodies than human, and relief is felt only when it is controlled. And when it is in bushy and marshy places of operssive climate, there it rages as epidemic. 
1128 :When it comes with cold and shivering, with pain such as headache, or with cough and shivers, then the attack of fever is really severe. Better it is kept away from us. 
1129 :Let fever never come with its concomitant ailments such as cough, dry or with sputum, or consumption. 11should becotrolled, notallowedtogrow on. I say this again and again. 
1130 :Fever with its brother-like cough and with its sister-like bronchitis is damned too bad, and inthisform it catches a poor person of weak immunity. 
1131 :Fever must be eliminated: whether it relapses on third day, or fourth day, or it comes daily, or in the cold season, whether it comes with cold and shivers, or with dryness and pain, or with heat and burning, or it comes in the rainy season. 
1132 :W hether fever comes and affects odorous people and spreads from them, or it affects weaker persons and spreads from them, or it affects persons of weak constitution and spreads from them, or it affects persons of ill-controlled habits and spreads from them, in any case we throw it out and eliminate it like infection brought in from another country and sent out like a foreigner, and thus we keep it away. 
1133 :earth are interlinked. Divine Sarasvati, radiant rays, showers of rain, running streams and currents of wind, all are interlinked, Indra and Agni, electric energy and fire energy, too are interlinked for us. May all these destroy the dangerous worms, insects, germs and bacteria which cause disease. 
1134 :Hey Indra, lord of health and wealth of the world, destroy the disease causing germs of this child's body system. Let all the negative forces of his body be destroyed by the intense action of the medicines of my prescription. 
1135 :(Indra here may be interpreted as the electric energy of nature or as the physician, and 'vachas' as the prescription given by the physician or, asSatavalekara's suggestion is, the vachas herb of Ayurveda which is highly efficacious for children.) We destroy the germs which creep and affect the eyes, which affect the nostrils, and which creep into the middle of the teeth. Those germs we destroy. 
1136 :The two similar in species, two of different species, two black ones, two red ones, the brown, those with brown tentacles, those that eat the cells, those that devour the cells, all are destroyed. 
1137 :The worms and germs with white sides, those black ones with white arms, those of different forms and varieties, all these we destroy. 
1138 :The sun rises in the east as the world watches, it destroys the visible as well as those negativities which are invisible to the naked eye. And it goes on killing and eliminating all worms and germs which are seen or unseen. 
1139 :Those that grow and move too fast, those too painful, those that give the shivers, and those that are intensely penetrative, the seen as well as unseen, all of them should be killed and eliminated. 
1140 :Destroyed are the fast ones, and destroyed are those that cause intolerable pain. All of them I have crushed as gram grain is crushed with stone. 
1141 :I destroy the worms and germs with three heads, those that are tri angular those that creep and are spotted, and those that are white and create abscess. I break their back and I break their head. 
1142 :O worms and germs, I destroy you asAtri, a devourer, like Kanva, intelligent planner, like Jamadagni, lighted fire. I destroy you with the knowledge and formula of Agastya, veteran scientist, and thus I destroy and wholly eliminate the worms and germs that cause disease. 
1143 :K illed is the ruling cause and condition of the germs, destroyed is their colony and the protective cover, killed is their breeder, killed their allies, male and female, all of them are destroyed. 
1144 :K illed are those that remained in their colony, killed are those around. And those that were too tiny, they too are destroyed. All of them are eliminated. 
1145 :Of all the worms and germs that are male and female, I break the head as with a stone, i.e., by a means beyond their resistance, and I burn their mouth with fire. 
1146 :Savita, lord of the light of life, is the supreme presiding power of all created beings. May Savita protect and guide us in the pursuit of this divine knowledge, in this programme of work, in this priestly task, in this office of respectable undertaking, in this intention, in this resolution, in this benediction, in this invocation and yajna in honour of the divine. This is the true voice from within. 
1147 :and trees. May Agni protect and promote in this pursuit of divine knowledge, in this particular act, in this priestly undertaking, in this settled position of responsibility, in this plan, in this resolution, in this discipline and benediction, and in this yajna in honour of divinities. This is the inner voice. 
1148 :May earth and heaven, presiding protectors of the generous, guide and promote me in this divine prayer and pursuit, in this particular act, in this pious undertaking, in this settled position of responsibility, in this plan, in this resolution, in this discipline and benediction, and in this yajna in honour of the divinities. This is the voice of the soul's prayer. 
1149 :Varuna is the presiding power of the cosmic waters. May Varuna protect and promote me in this holy pursuit of knowledge and prayer, in this holy act, in this priestly task, in this honourable undertaking, in this thought, in this resolution, in this benedition, and in this yajnic service to the divinities. This is the inner voice and prayer in truth. 
1150 :Sun and the sea are the presiding powers of rain. May they protect and promote me in this holy pursuit of Vedic studies, in this holy act, in this priestly duty, in this honourable responsibility, in this plan and programme, in this decision, in this benediction and discipline and in this yajna in the service of divinities. This is the true voice of the soul. 
1151 :M aruts are the controlling forces of the clouds and mountains. May they protect and promote me in this holy pursuit of divine knowledge, in this particular programme, in this pious priestly undertaking, in this prestigious position, in this plan, in this resolution, in this discipline and benediction, and in this yajna of the divinities. This is the voice of the soul, in truth. 
1152 :Soma, spirit of cosmic vitality, is the life and presiding power of herbs and trees. May soma protect and promote me in this spiritual pursuit of divinity, in this programme, in this holy undertaking, in this prestigious position, in this plan, in this resolution, in thisdisciplineand realisation of benediction, and in this yajna of the divinities. This is the inner voice of the soul in truth of thought, word and deed. 
1153 :Vayu, wind and electric energy, is the presiding power of the middle regions. May Vayu protect and promote me in this spiritual pursuit of divinity, in this programme on hand, in this holy undertaking, in this settled position of honour, in this plan, in this resolution, in this benediction, and in this yajna of the divinities. This is the voice of the soul in prayer in truth. 
1154 :Surya, thesun, is the presiding power of thelight of the eyes. May the sun protect and promote me with vision in this spiritual pursuit of divinity, in this work on hand, in this holy undertaking, in this settled position of honour, in this plan, in this resolution, in this benediction, and in this yajna of the divinities. This is the inner voice in truth. 
1155 :Chandrama, the moon, the cosmic spirit of joy and beauty, is the presiding power of the shining joyous stars of the world. May Chandrama protect and promote me in this divine pursuit of universal knowledge, in this work on hand, in this priestly commission, in this prestigious position, in this thoughtful plan, in this resolution, in this divine blessing, in this yajnic service of divinities. This is the voice of the soul in all sincerity. 
1156 :Indra, lord omnipotent, is the presiding power and sustainer of the heavens. May Indra protect and promote me in this holy programme of divine learning, in this plan on hand, in this priestly task, in this prestigious position, in this project, in this resolution, in this blessed scheme, and in this divine act of yajna. This is a soulful prayer in all honesty of thought, word and deed. 
1157 :The cosmic energy is the sustainer of the winds and all vibrant forces of the world. It is sustainer of all living beings. May this lord almighty protect and promote me in this divine programme of learning, in this new project in hand, in this priestly task, in this prestigious position, in this planned work, in this resolution, in this position of benediction, and in this divine act of yajna in honour of the divinities. This is a soulful prayer in honesty of thought, word and deed. 
1158 :M rtyu, divine law of life and death, is the ruling power of the living, the people. May that power divine protect and promote me in this divine scheme of life and work, in this work I am doing, in this priestly task, in this prestigious position, in this planned project, in this resolution, in this blessed work, and in this yajnic life dedicated to the divinities. This is the voice of the soul in earnest. 
1159 :Yama, the lord of cosmic justice, is the presiding power of the souls in the state of life death cycle. May Yama and good wishes of our forefathers and the pranic energies preserve, protect and promote me in this divine process of living, in this programme of life and learning, in this priestly task of divine service, in this prestigious state of human life, in this intelligent way of living, in this faith and resolve of honourable living, and in this blessed life on earth. This is the true voice of the heart and soul in faith. 
1160 :May the good wishes and memories of the farthest ancestors protect and promote me in this holy life of divine nature, in this life work I am doing, inthis priestlike task, in this noble position, in this intelligent living, in this life of faith and resolution, in this state of benediction and in this yajnic course of life dedicated to the divinities. This is the earnest prayer from the depth of the heart. 
1161 :May the parental powers of closer time protect and promote me in this divine life, in this work I am doing, in this priestlike task of life, in this noble settled position, in this intelligent way of living, in this life of faith and resolution, in this state of benediction, and in this yajnic course of life dedicated to divinities. This is the earnest prayer from the depth of the heart. 
1162 :May our parents and grand parents and their parents protect and promote me in this divine process of living and learning, in this programme of work, in this priestly task of life, in this position of prestige, in this planned life, in this resolution of good living, in this blessed life and in this yajnic life dedicated to the divinities. This is the voice of truth from the depth of heart and soul in earnest prayer. 
1163 :(L ife is a gift of our parents and our forefathers. It is a gift of Nature, and ultimately it is a gift of God. They that give never wi sh that it be wasted or destroyed, they protect it too and help us I i vei t the way it i s i ntended to be lived. This sukta suggests that we pray for protection and promotion, and we live it, through every thing we do, and every moment we live, for the personal, social and divine purpose and fulfilmentfor which it is D istilled from the mountain and the cloud, from the sun and the fertility of nature, collected from every cel I of the body i s the seed of I if e. The val i ant bearer of this seed of life deposits it in the womb as the lord creator places the sun in space. 
1164 :"Just as this great earth bears the seed as womb of all living beings, so do I bear your seed of life." "For the protection, growth and maturity of that I court you." (This mantra can be interpreted as a dialogue between the wife and the husband, or as the address of the husband of the wife, or as the address of the wife to the husband. In any of these ways, the meaning remains clearly similar.) O mother fecundity of Nature, O mother Sarasvati, divine flow of cosmic intelligence, bear, protect and promote the seed in the womb. O Ashvins, complementarities of nature's cyclic energy, bearing and wearing the flowery garlands of nature's fragrant essences of pranic vitality, pray hold, protect and promote the foetus in the womb. 
1165 :O mother, let M itraand Varuna, prana and apana energies hold and mature your foetus. Let divine and refulgent Brhaspati, the generous sun protect and promote your foetus. Let I ndra and Agni, cosmicenergy and vital heat of life, hold and nourish your foetus. Let Dhata, the omnipotent wielder and sustainer of the universe, sustain, promote and mature your foetus in the womb. 
1166 :Let Vishnu, omnipresent life energy, strengthen and sustain your womb. LetTvashta, Nature's shaping power, form and finish the structure and function of all the organs of the foetus. Let P rajapati, father of al 11 i vi ng creatures nourish and energise the foetus. Let Dhata, cosmic sustainer, hold and sustain the foetus to maturity. 
1167 :Whatever liquid energy and vitality, the ruling Varuna, sun and waters, hold, whatever energy and intelligence mother Sarasvati holds, whatever energy and power Indra, destroyer of darkness and evil, has, all that vitality, intelligence and energy which feeds and forms the foetus, O mother, receive and assimilate from nature. 
1168 :O Agni, vitality of life, you are the life sustainer of herbs, you are the life sustainer of trees, you are the life sustainer of all living beings of the world. Pray sustain and mature the foetus here in the womb. 
1169 :the womb. You are strong and profuse in manliness. We exhort you only for procreation. 
1170 :Wax with thedivinejoy of hymnal divinity, and let the seed be placed in the womb. May the divinities of nature and humanity, all lovers and protectors of creative Soma bless you with noble progeny for both of us. 
1171 :O Dhata, sustainer of all living beings, pray sustain and mature virile progeny with noblestform and character in the womb of this mother between her groins to be born on maturation in the tenth month. 
1172 :O Tvashta, maker of forms, pray form and mature virile progeny with noblestform and character in the womb of this mother between her groins to be born on maturation in the tenth month. 
1173 :O Savita, lord creator, sustain and mature virile progeny with noblest form and character in the womb of this mother between her groins to be born on maturation in the tenth month. 
1174 :O Prajapati, universal father of the children of nature and humanity, sustain and mature virile progeny with noblest form and character in the womb of this mother between her groins to be born on maturation in the tenth month. 
1175 :May Agni, learned scholar and enlightened scientist of yajna, lightthesamits, holyfuel, and fragrant materials and use the verses of Yajurveda here in this yajna in the home for you, i.e., inmates of the house. This is my prayer in truth of thought, word and deed. 
1176 :May the generous Savita, all inspiring creative genius, mighty potent and all aware, use the verses of Yajurveda and fragrant havis here in this yajna in the home. This is my prayer and submission in truth of heart and soul. 
1177 :May the eminent scholar and friendly companion, Indra, use inspiring and exhilarating hymns of the Veda in this yajna here in the home. This is my prayer and submission in truth of heart and soul. 
1178 :May eminent men of initiative, learned scholars and cultured pioneers of the science of yajna with their wivesjoin and conduct this yajna herein the home. This is my earnest prayer and submission. 
1179 :May the M aruts, vibrant brave and heroic people, join us in this yajna and, like mother for the child, bring us fulfilment of the Vedic prayers and cherished ambitions. This is my prayer and submission in truth. 
1180 :May inviolable mother Aditi with yajna sanctities and fragrances come and join us extending this yajna with her showers of blessings. This is my prayer and submission in all sincerity. 
1181 :May Vishnu, omnipresent spirit of divinity, the sage of universal love, companionable friend, bring us manifold disciplines of austerity and join us in this yajna. This is my prayer and submission in truth. 
1182 :May Tvashta, formative spirit of nature, and the man of subtle and refined thoughts and forms, companionable friend, come, join us in this yajna and bless us with many forms of yajna and yajnic achievements. This is my prayer and submission in truth. 
1183 :May Bhaga, divinespiritof prosperity, holy and companionable friend, join us in this yajna and bring us divine blessings. Let the eminent scholar, friendly and cooperative, join us in this yajna and bring us manifold advantages. This is my prayer and submission in earnest. 
1184 :May Soma, divine spirit of peace and bliss, the man of peace and joy, spontaneous cooperative friend, join us here in this yajna and lead us to many forms of new exhilarating and dynamic ways of wealth and peaceful joy. This is my earnest prayer and submission. 
1185 :May Indra, spirit of omnipotence, and man of power and initiative, real companion friend, come and join this yajna and bring us manifold powers and new possibilities. This is my prayer and submission in right earnest. 
1186 :O Ashvins, complementarities of natural dynamics, dynamic men and women, come straight with divine knowledge and promote the yajna with ever new and more productive holy inputs. O B rhaspati, Spirit of Infinity, O scholar of divine knowledge, come straight with the universal knowledge and possibilities revealed in the Veda. May this yajna be rising high to the regions of light and bliss for the yajamana and his new home. This is my prayer and submission in right earnest. 
1187 :High are the fuel sticks of this Agni in flames, high, radiant and pure its lights. Most refulgent, most glorious, assisted by many noble active forces, it is infallible and inviolable in body, highly energetic and boundless in power and force. 
1188 :(Agni is a metaphor. It stands for self-refulgent Divinity, brilliant leader, sagely scholar and any such other leading power.) Divine among divinities, self-refulgent and generous, it opens and illumines new paths of life and sprinkles them with honey sweets of light and ghrta. 
1189 :Self-refulgent Agni, admired and adored by humanity, energises, advances and beautifies yajna and yajnic operations of human karma with honey sweets of beauty and dignity. Noble performer, refulgent illuminator, creative inspirer, Agni is the universal choice of human love and exaltation. 
1190 :This Agni, carrier and advancer of yajna, loved, adored and served with ghrta, yajnic food and devotion, goes forward with full power and glory of light. 
1191 :Agni is to be loved, served and worshipped in yajna with offers of oblations with ladlefuls of ghrta. Lettheyajamana recognise, honour and internalise the Agni isthe saviour, adorable, and to be honoured by yajna in matters of life Dnd on occasions of joy and celebration. More liberal and greater sustainer of life and life's wealth than the sustainers it is, because the life supports themselves are supported by Agni. 
1192 :All the doors of divine experience and knowledge of the world such as the organs of sense, understanding and judgement follow, abide by and maintain the discipline of its law without relent, all the time. 
1193 :Receiving their light, power and parental efficacy for us from the wide expansive splendour of divine Agni, the night and dawn, blissful sisterly divinities moving on together, may, we pray, protect and promote this our yajna of love and non-violent advancement of humanity and the environment. 
1194 :May the divine yajna performers of nature and humanity promote and exalt our yajna of love, nonviolence and socio-natural cohesion by the rising flames of Agni and the vaulting words of divinity, and thus may they promote and exalt our yajna for our common good. And may the three great divinities, Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati, divine N ature, divine knowledge and divine ethics and policy of holistic nature emanating from absolute divinity, Vedic knowledge and the sanctity of great living existence, seated on this vedi of our yajna of the social human order promote and bless us and our yajnic programme. 
1195 :May divine Tvashta, creator and maker of refined forms and institutions, create and grant us that abundant, wonderful wealth, energy and food for body, mind and soul that grows fast for all, place it at the centre-vedi of the social order, open up doors of prosperity and relieve us of all want and suffering. 
1196 :O Vanaspati, lord of nature, protector and promoter of forest, botanist of high order, happy and enthusiastic at heart, with your very soul create and release for the devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, all dedicated to yajna, holy and refined materials for inputs of the yajna of development, and Agni, enlightened spirit of the nation, lover of peace and stability, would be delighted with the state of society and its prosperity. 
1197 :Agni, lord of world knowledge take this holy offering and, in all holiness and sincerity, refine and raise the yajna to the grace and glory of Indra, spirit of power and prosperity of humanity. And may all the Devas of nature and humanity share this holy gift and rejoice. 
1198 :Lord Almighty joins nine pranic energies in proper accord with ninefor a long life of hundred years, three in gold, three in silver and three in iron are integrated in accordance with the quality and intensity of nature and character in relation to natural law and discipline. (Gold, silver and iron are concrete versions of the Sattva, Rajas and Tamas variations of personality.) Note: This mantra is a comprehensive foreshadow of all the fourteen verses of the hymn. 
1199 :This sukta presents a symbolic vision of the relation of human personality with nature. It also presents a symbolic interpretation of the three threefold threads of the sacred yajnopavita as our link with life. 
1200 :Prana energisSs all our human faculties at the rational, emotional and instinctive levels. AII these three are further classified into sattvic, Rajasic and Tamasic levels of high, medium, and low order. The division thus is ninefold. Prana energises all of them in accordance with the character and intensity of each. Basically prana is one as personality too is one. 
1201 :The three sacred threads, each of them threefold, of the yajnopavita symbolise the relationship of the spiritual, intellectual and familial sides of our personality to the divine, educational and procreative sides of life, reminding us of our obligations: worship of God, gratitude to teachers and seniors, and respect to our parents with affectionate service. 
1202 :Just as nine orders of prana are at source one, and nine variations of personality are one, just so the 3x3 threads of the yajnopavita are three circulations of onethread knotted at the point where the beginning and the end of the thread coincide. The knot is known as divine, Brahma knot. 
1203 :Aspects of the life-prana symbolism and the significance of the sacred thread in relation to life and duty are reflected in the mantras. 
1204 :May Agni, vital heat, sun, moon, earth, waters, solar regions, middle regions, four quarters of space, and the interdirections, all these nine accordant with the seasons and through al I seasons take me successful ly across the course of life by this triple armour of pranic energy, the course symbol ised by the tri pie yaj nopavita. 
1205 :(Nine aspects of nature accordant with the seasons, and nine orders of our personality are related here through the intermediacy of prana. N ine orders of personality may be interpreted as our rational, emotional and instinctive life lived at sattvic, rajasic and tamasic level or the physical, mental and spiritual life lived at three levels. All the nine orders of personality, nine orders of nature and nine orders of prana are to be harmonious and in accord with the seasons of the year and seasons of lifefrom the first to thelastdaysof life. 
1206 :Yajnopavita symbolises the living across the course of life: First twenty five years of Brahmacharya for study and preparation, next twenty five years of Grhastha for family life, next twenty five years of Banaprastha in retirement, all symbolised by three threads of the yajnopavita. In the fourth phase of twenty five years of Sanyasa, the yajnopavita is relinquished because life and nature-better call it personality and nature-are identified, beyond the relationship, symbol and symbolised are one.) Tray ah posdstrivrti srayantdmanaktu push paya- sa ghrtena. Annasya bhumd purusasya bhumd bhumd pasundm ta iha srayantdm. 
1207 :May three orders of growth and abundance abide in the threefold order of pranic energy from the heavens, skies and earth, and symbolically in the threefold yajnopavita, and may the divine spirit of cosmic nourishment, growth and abundance, Pusha, bless us with water, milk and ghrta. May abundance of food and energy, abundance of people, and abundance of wealth and animals abide here in this life. (The symbol i c reference to threefold yajnopavita enj oi ns that along with prayer man has to justify prayer with effort and action as well. The yajnopavita is not only a human privilege, it is also a divine commandment. One who fails to keep the commandment for knowledge, action and prayer for potential beyond actual strength and performance fails to honourtheprivilegeand fal I s from the privilege.) O Adityas, lights of the sun over the year, shower this soul with the wealth of light and vitality. O Agni, energy and fertility of mother earth, growing, rising and raising, advance this soul in prosperity. O Indra, cosmic energy of the middle regions of the sky, strengthen and exhilarate this soul with valour and creative splendour. O Lord Supreme, let the triple armour of light, power and prosperity of the three cosmic regions abide here in the soul, advancing and exalting the person. (The yajnopavita also has been interpreted as the triple armour.) O wearer of the triple armour, may Bhumi, the world of expansive existence, protect and promote you with the golden glory of higher life. May Agni, spirit and energy of the earth, loving and companionable, which holds and sustains the world of life, bless you with the strength of steel. And may the middle regions, with herbs and trees which they bless with sap, bear and bring for you the silver sense of lovely peace and joy of mind and life's expertise worthy of love and value. 
1208 :This golden glory of life's strength and splendour is born three-way from the very beginning of I ife: O ne i s the dearest darl i ng of Agni and the profuse generosity of earth, the other one is born of Soma crushed, descended from the moon and reflected from the sun, and yet another one, they say, is the living essence of cosmic waters and universal intelligence of N ature. A nd that is the golden glory for you, threefold, the triple armour for you, for health and long age. 
1209 :Triple and thrice brilliant is the life of Jamadagni, the man of fiery tempered vitality of B rahmacharya. Triple and thrice far reaching is the life of Kashyapa, the man of universal vision and wisdom. Threefold is the voice of the Lord of Immortality: "I have created and ordained triple threefold span of life foryou", lifeof knowledge, action and worship for three to four hundred years. 
1210 :Three mighty sojourners wearing the triple armour ofjnana (knowledge), Karma (rightaction) and Bhakti (divine worship), who rise, having self-realised the spirit and presence of the One Imperishable Om, transcend the fear and pain of death at a single stroke by the vision of Immortality after they have overcome all the negativitiesand fIuctuationsof material existence within. (Three sojours: J nana yogis, Karma yogis and Bhakti yogis, or Vasu, Rudra and Aditya scholars, or senses, mind and soul.) May the golden glory of nature's sattva protect and promote you from the region of heaven. May the silver beauty of nature's rajas protect and promote you from the middle region. May the iron strength of nature's tamas protect and promote you from the regions of the earth. Thus does this soul reach the region of divinities. 
1211 :These three, golden glory of the Sattva of nature, silver beauty of the Rajas of nature, and iron strength of theTamas of nature, are the divine stages of the soul's progress. Bearing these, wearing this triple armour of protection and progress, brilliant and enlightened, rise higher and keep all hate and jealousy down and defeated. May all these, all-ways, protect you against all negativities. 
1212 :That eternal and immortal Spirit of the universe wrapped in golden mystery istheseat of divinities which the prime cause of the universe, self-refulgent and selfmanifest Brahman, brings into manifestation, first. To thatSpiritomnipresentin all ten directions, I do homage. May the Spirit of three-matras, OM , graciously accept me as I bind myself to the discipline of the threefold sacred thread. Pray, bless me and my resolution. 
1213 :O seeker of light and wisdom, may Aryama, divine path maker, Pusha, lord of life's nourishment, and Brhaspati, lord of infinity, accept you into the filial bond. We accept you and enfold you in that open ended and expansive light and brilliance which is the innate and essential nature and character of the sun which daily rises with new splendour. 
1214 :Forthelight of lifeand a long age of health and refinement in accord with the seasons, with all gifts of the seasons, we strengthen you and temper you with that splendour of the yearly course of the sun which would make you inviolable against all injustice and opposition. 
1215 :O man, born of light, refined with sweets as honey, firm as earth, immovable, eager to lead and cross the seas, breaking through adversaries and defeating opposition and evil, come, rise with me for self- fulfilment and well being of high order. 
1216 :O Agni, Jataveda, general physician of comprehensive knowledge of disease and medicine, come as appointed in advance, know what it is now to be done. You are the physician, you are the maker of the medicine. By you, your knowledge and application, let us have a nation of healthy people, fertile cows and fleet horses. 
1217 :O Agni, Jataveda, since you know and meet all brilliant scholars and specialists and you know all the divine herbs and sanatives of the world, decide and do that what you would so that whatever ailment and disease vexes us and consumes our health is eliminated to the last bounds of its effect. 
1218 :Agni, Jataveda, in order that the disease with its cause be eliminated to the bounds of its prevalence, do that what you decide but in consultation with all the brilliant scholars and specialists in the field and with the joint consolidated knowledge of all the divine herbs and sanatives you know. 
1219 :Agni, whoever or whatever the blood sucking agent of the enemy, fix it in the eyes, pierce the heart, piercethetongue, break the teeth. Whatever or whoever vexes and consumes us, O most youthful defender, break that down to dust. 
1220 :O Agni, Jataveda, learned physician, whatever of the health of body and mind of this person has been taken off, eaten up or robbed away by the blood sucking devils, that you repair, replenish and restore to full health. Let us rebuild and restore the muscle and pranic energy in the patient's body. 
1221 :Whatever polluting and life threatening germs enter and pollute our food— whether raw, cooked, half cooked, fully cooked— and damage our health, let these be countered and destroyed in themselves and with their further growth, and let this patient be restored to good health. 
1222 :Whatever germs in milk, in butter milk or in wild grains enter our food and damage us, let these be countered and destroyed in themselves and with their further growth, and let the affected patient restored to good health. 
1223 :Of the flesh eating damagers, whatever germs of waters in our drink damage us, and whatever bugs or germs in bed infect the person sleeping there, let these be countered and destroyed in themselves and with their further growth, and let the person affected be restored to good health. 
1224 :Of the life damagers whatever carnivorous insects or germs infect and damage me day or night sleeping in bed, let these be countered and destroyed, themselves and with their further growth, and let the perrson affected be restored to good health. 
1225 :Agni, Jataveda, whatever the life threatening insect and germ, whether in the flesh or in blood or mind damaging, destroy that. Let Indra, energy treatment, destroy that with strike of the current of adequate degree. Let Soma, regenerative sanative of irresistible power, break the head of the damager. 
1226 :O Agni, physician, heat of fire, radiation of energy, you always destroy life-damaging elements of the environment. Negative forces never win againstyou in the battles of health and recovery. Pray burn up and destroy all life damaging insects and germs along with their roots and origin. Let none of them escape from the stroke of your life saving force. 
1227 :O jataveda, recover and consolidate whatever has been lost and robbed away. Let parts of the body system recover and grow I ike filaments of the lotus and be whole as phases of the moon. (The mantra suggests the possibility of the regeneration of vital organs also.) Agni, Jataveda, let this patient recover and grow like filaments of the lotus and be whole like phases of the moon. Let him be fully healthy, strong, vigorous, fresh and free from negativities. Let him live his full Agni, holy fire, these are your divine fuel sticks which burn and destroy life threatening forces of pollution and disease. O J ataveda, pray accept these into the lighted fire, love these, be happy and beneficent to us for health and purity. 
1228 :O Agni, raised and rising inthevedi, pray accept these fuel sticks of trshtagha tree by the flames of fire so that the life damaging infection which consumes the flesh of this patient may give up its form and force and the patient may recover. 
1229 :met nu ga md purvdnanu gdh pitrnasum badhnami te drdham. 
1230 :energy against any danger which may be closer than the closest or farther than the farthest. Stay here, alive and strong. Do notfollow the forefathers dead and gone. Do notfollow the parents either, for they too would go earlier. Follow them alive and keep up their tradition. 
1231 :If there be a person distant and wrong, or if there be a person, your own, who may do wrong, I speak to you about how to forestall the wrong or how to face it with confidence and overcome it. 
1232 :Out of wantonness of mind, hate or anger, if you have sworn at, cursed or reviled a man or woman, I would speak and advise you both ways, how to forestall the evil or how to face it with self-confidence and overcome it. 
1233 :And if you are suffering the consequences of sin committed by your father or mother, either way I would speak and advise you how to forestall the effects or face them with success. 
1234 :Whatever relief, sanative or medicament for healing your mother, father, sister, and brother prepare and offer you, accept and take that straight. I advise and strengthen you to live a full span of age with good health. 
1235 :O man, stay here in life with all your mind and senses in full healthy order. Do not follow the messengers of death, let day and night pass without adversly affecting you. Go on in the celestial city of the spirit, living happy. 
1236 :Called again, come again, knowing the path of dawn and ascent. To rise, to go forward on and on that is the orbit of life for every living person. 
1237 :Fear not, you shall not die. I have taught and strengthened you to live a full age of hundred years. I havetaughtyou and I have eliminated the germinal roots of cancer, consumption and fever from every part of your body. 
1238 :Arthritis, consumptive fever of body parts, cardiac problems, cancer, all, devitalised and driven off through health education, have flown far away like a hawk. 
1239 :Knowledge and awareness by direct sense experience and inference and by creative response and memory are two visionary guards of personality which never sleep and keep awake. O man, they both are protectors of your life energy. Let these keep awake as This life energy isworthy of reverence. By virtue of this, your life's spirit arises in the body. O J iva, soul of life, rise beyond the deep cave of death and beyond the darkest of the dark and negation. 
1240 :HomagetoYama, lord ordainer of lifeand death. Homage be to death which leads to life's renewal. H omage to Pitr pranas which carry us on and forward. That Agni, lord supreme of life and light, who knows the mystery of I ife and death and the transcendence from lifeand death, we keep upfront in mind for our ultimate well being and salvation. 
1241 :and let energy come. Let consciousness cometo thebody and then let the person stand on the feet. 
1242 :O Agni, regenerate, recreate this person with pranas, with eye sight, let him move with strength and body. You know of life and mortality and immortality. Let him not go. Let him not fall to dust. 
1243 :Your prana must not fail. Your apana must not be closed. May the sun, presiding light of life, revive and raise you with its rays. 
1244 :This quivering tongue, bound within the mouth, now speaks. I drive outthe cancerous consumption from your body and silence a hundred fever pains that torment you. 
1245 :This human world unsurpassed by any other is dearest of the divines, dedicated to which and destined to die, O man, you are born here. You of that destiny and privilege, we call on to come and we pronounce: You must not die before you have had a full span of life unto perfect old age of ripeness. 
1246 :O man, O ruler, whatever mischief, pollution or poison, negative elements of nature or antisocial elements of society have done in respect of food and water, and whatever such they have done in various food grains or in raw fleshy fruits and other foods, all that I counter, render ineffective, and return to the mischief maker. 
1247 :(In certain interpretations this mantra, in fact the whole sukta has been made to appear as a magic spell. But looked at carefully and scientifically, it reads like a report of the department of food control, water resources and vigilance.) W hatever mischief they have done to the cock and the peacock or to the goat and the ram or the sheep, that I counter, defuse and return to the doer (by way of punishment). 
1248 :W hatever they have done to one hoof animals such as the horse or to animals of double teeth or to the donkey, all that I counter and return to the doer. 
1249 :Whatever they have done to the amula and narachi herbs in secret, or whatever mischief they have done to the field, all that I counter and return to the W hatever damage the evi I at heart have done to the hearth and home, or to the sacred eastern fire, or to the house, all that I counter and return to the doer. 
1250 :Whatever damage they do in the assembly or in gardens and play grounds, or whatever mischief they do in gambling dens, all that I counter and render back to the doer. 
1251 :Whatever damage they do in the defence forces or in arms and ammunition or in reconnaissance and signals, all that I counter and recharge on the doer. 
1252 :Whatever damage they do to the water resources, or whatever evil they do and hide in the well or bury and conceal in the cremation ground, or whatever mischief they do in your own house, all that I counter and throw it on the head of the doer. 
1253 :Whatever damage they cause in human bones or in the form of destructive blazing fire, I counter and pay the saboteur, arsonist and the carnivore back in the same coin. 
1254 :The mischief maker brought about the mischief by a crooked path. That mischief we undo and throw out by the correct path. Thoughtless fools out of ignorance and wantonness bring about such trouble for people of patient mind and fortitude. 
1255 :The fool that did the mischief, or wanted to do but was not able to accomplish it, after all broke his own leg and burnt his own fingers. Any way, the unfortunate wretch did good to us who, blest and fortunate, happy and prosperous, are now warned and stand on guard against mischief, sin and crime. 
1256 :Let Indra, the ruler and all men of power and wisdom, with a mighty stroke of justice and punishment, eliminate the evil doer, secret saboteur, the rooted deceiver and the leader of the evil doers. Let Agni, far seeing commander of the police, and commander of the defence forces, fix and shoot him out with his weapon. 
1257 :Atharva, O sage of stable mind, sing and celebrate the glory of Savita, lord of life. Sing of him night and day. Sing of him spontaneously and profusely. H old the refulgent divine at heart. Worship the lord of light and life and exalt him. 
1258 :Worship that who rolls in the sea and vibrates in the depth of the heart, inspiring, exalting, life giving, eternal youthful, integrating, disintegrating and reintegrating the world of truth and reality, original source of the word of love free from jealousy and negativity, sole lord worthy of worship and service. 
1259 :May the self-refulgent Savita bless us with plentiful gifts of immortal value. Let us sing and celebrate him morning and evening and seek the light to lead us forward on the path of rectitude. 
1260 :Holy performers of yajna according to the seasons, press the soma of immortality in honour of Indra, omnipotent lord of life and life's joy, distil it to purest purity, for he I istens to the prayers of the celebrant and responds to my call of invocation. 
1261 :O Lord Almighty, unto whom all streams of immortal glory and pearls of soma celebration converge and return I ike birds to the tree for the night's rest, listen to our prayer and cast out and eliminate all self-violating fluctuations of the mind from our soul. 
1262 :O celebrants of Indra, lord of soma peace and glory, press the soma of homage and prayer for Indra, w i el der of the thunderbolt against evi I and I over of peace and life's glory, for he is the ever youthful lord beyond ageand change, he is the eternal victor, he is the supreme ruler and law giver, and he is the sole object of universal adoration. 
1263 :May Indra and Pusha, electric and wind energy of the world, protect us. May Aditi, inviolable Prakrti, protect us. May the M aruts, vibrant scholars and sages protect us. May the never exhausting waters and the seven seas protect us. May all pervasive Vishnu and the light of heaven protect us all. 
1264 :May heaven and earth protect us for our well being. May the cloud and soma, the moon, protect us from sin and violence. May Sarasvati, divine and glorious spiritof knowledge and culture, protect us. May Agni, all virtues of which are blissful, protect us. 
1265 :May divine Ashvins, complementarities of divine nature, both protectors and promoters of life's good, protect us. May the day and night protect us. O Tvashta, lord maker of the universe and sustainer of the waters of the cloud, save and protect us from adversity of the home and promote us for all round progress and well being. 
1266 :MayTvashta, divine maker, Parj anya, the di vine cloud, Brahmanaspati, lord omniscient and giver of universal knowledge, and Aditi, mother nature with her sons and brothers, i.e., her creations and assistant powers, listen to my prayer to divinity, accept them and protect us and our invincible, all saving and protective May Ansha, lord refulgent, Bhaga, giver of prosperity, Varuna, spirit of justice, M itra, spirit of love and friendship, Aryama, spirit of advancement, Aditi, mother earth, and M aruts, vibrant brave, protect and promote us. Let the jealousy and enmity of the crooked be away while they ward off the enemy close at hand. 
1267 :May the A shvi ns, circuitous currents of natural dynamics, protect us for our intellectual growth. May nature's might straight and never deceiving protect us. May the lord of heavens cast away all evil and adversity that afflicts us. 
1268 :O refulgent Agni raised and fed on ghrta, lead thishumanity higher and higher. Bless itwith light and lustre and and let it rise and prosper with progeny. 
1269 :I ndra, let this man rise higher so that he can be the leader and controller of his equals around. Bless him with abundant growth, and for a full healthy life take him to fullness of age with gratitude to divinity. 
1270 :Agni, presiding power of yajna, raise and advance the man in whose house we light the fire and offer havi into the vedi, and Soma and B rahmanaspati, spirit of peace and prosperity and the lord divine of Veda too would appreciate and speak for him. 
1271 :Brahmanaspati, lord of expansive universe and the Vedic Word, whoever the man, the negationist, who insults us out of arrogance, subdue him wholly for our sake and for the yajamana who prepares the soma and does homage to you on the vedi. 
1272 :O Soma, lord of peace and yajnic growth and joy, whoever the reviler that bullies us, celebrants of divinity, break his jaw with the thunderbolt so that he goes off crushed and demoralized. 
1273 :O Soma, whover the man that enslaves us, whether of kin or a stranger, deprive him of his strength and down him with the thunderbolt like the sun driving out darkness from over the earth. 
1274 :O Soma, come and be with us for our protection and advancement, by the path whereby A diti, inviolable earth, and M itra, sun and other stars, move in orbit without hate or jealousy. 
1275 :O Soma, lord of peace, patience and the pleasures of life, come by the path by which you move and punish the demons, and speak to us of peace and freedom. 
1276 :O Devas, divinities of nature and humanity, come by the paths you take to cover and stall the force of demons, and give us peace and a happy home. 
1277 :embrace me wholly around so that you may wholly be mine loving me and you never go away from me. 
1278 :Just as the eagle, flying, presses its wings down earthward, so do I press down upon your mind so that you may be mine loving me and never go away from me. 
1279 :Just as the sun instantly covers both heaven and earth together with lightsodo I cover and fill your mind with lovethat so you may be wholly mineandyou never go away from me. 
1280 :L ove my body, I ove my feet, I ove my eyes, I ove my thighs. Overwhelmed with my exuberant love, let your eyes and hair afflict me with your love. 
1281 :I make you rest on my shoulder, I make you rest in my heart so that you may be one with my intent and action, so that you may reside in my heart. 
1282 :Whose bond is kissing and caress, and love charm is fascination in the heart, may those vibrations of sense and love, creators of the honey sweets of life, bind her in love with me. 
1283 :Homage to earth, ear, herbs and trees and Agni, presiding power of the earth. 
1284 :Homage to prana, middle region, birds, and Vayu, presiding power of the skies. 
1285 :Homage to the region of light, eye, stars and the Sun, presiding power of the heavenly region. 
1286 :(In this sukta the relation between the human and the natural world is shown: Earth, Agni, Vanaspati, and ear; middle region, Vayu, birds, and prana; solar region, sun, stars and the eye. So homage to nature is homage to yourself and your faculties.) A n ashvattha plant rooted and grown on a shami tree is the medication and tonic for punsavana, i.e., the tonic for the birth of a male child. We prescribe for the women. 
1287 :The seed is in the male. That is sown in the female. This, with the use of the ashvattha, is the sure centainty for a male child. This is what Prajapati, father and sustainer of humanity has said. 
1288 :Let Prajapati, the father, be sober and agreeable at heart. Let the mother too be strong and graceful. Thus the conception would be male. Otherwise the conception would be female. 
1289 :(This sukta says two things for the birth of a male child: the powder of five parts of a peepal tree rooted and grown on a shami tree taken by the woman produces certain chemical and genetic conditions in the woman for the birth of a male child. Secondly, the man should be virile, and the wife should be sober at heart and graceful in culture and conduct. In addition, there should be perfect harmony, anumati, between the man and wife.) Justasthesun pervades the heavenly region with light, so do I know the snakes from their very origin till the end. And just as darkness of the night covers the world other than where the sun shines, so by that knowledge I dispel the cover of your poison. 
1290 :W hat was known by the visionaries of divinity, by the seers who realised the divine knowledge, and by brilliant men of generous mind since ancient times, that knowledgewhich was true and isevertrue, past, present and future, by that I remove the cover of your poison, illusion and darkness. 
1291 :I join you with madhu, nectar of the herbs. The rivers, mountains, clouds, all yield the nectar of life. The sparkling stream, the sheepala herbs, all is madhu, nectar sweet of I ife. May there be peace and comfort i n your mouth. Let there be peace in the heart. 
1292 :(There is no word in this sukta which specifically and exclusively means ‘the snake'. The word 'ahi' means snake as well as darkness which implies ignorance also. 'Visha' means anything perniciously active which can be poison as well as ignorance. The sukta therefore has been interpreted in the physical sense of' recovery from poison', as well as in the psychic and spiritual sense of 'recovery from ignorance and illusion'. The suggestion of darkness is clear in the first verse itself with the reference to night covering the world with darkness in the absence of the sun.Theremedysugg ested i n th e th i rd v erse i s' m ad h u', which Swami Dayananda explains as knowledge, karma and meditation in his commentary on Yajurveda 37,13 and 19,91 where knowledge is explained as the essence of existence like honey being the essence of herbs collected by the bee.) Homage to the weapons of the devas, homage to the weapons of the rulers and warriors, and homage to the weapons of the citizens. O Death, homage to you. (Death is mighty.) Homage to your word of valediction, homage to the word of malediction, homage to the mind that appreciates you, homage to the mind that reviles and hates you. This word of homage to you, O Death. 
1293 :H oamge to you for the pai ns and sufferi ngs that come in the trail with you. Homage to the medicaments that stall you and may sometimes hasten you. Homage to the root causes that bring you about. O Death, let this be the homage to the learned and the wise men of divinity. (They know what and why it is as it is.) O life energy of nature, O physician, cure and eliminate the weakness of the bones and joints, cleanse out the dirt and disease that has settled in the heart. Remove all the cancerous consumptions which affect the limbs and which accumulate in the joints. 
1294 :I reduce and rootoutthecancerousconsumption from the patient that suffers from cough imbalance and drive it out like a thief of life. I break the bond of it over the body and uproot it like the root of melon. 
1295 :Let the consumption go out from here as a bolting foal, and go away without doing any damage to the patient, like withered sedge of yester year. 
1296 :O herbal sanative, O soma, you are the best of herbs, trees are lower than you, subordinate. O lord, Prajapati, whoever wants to enslave us, let him be down under us, subordinate, not even equal. 
1297 :W hoever, whether with friends and brothers and relatives or without friends and brothers and relatives, wants to boss over us, let me be the highest over them like the soma herb which is the best even over trees. 
1298 :Just as soma is the best of herbs, the best of yajna havis too, so, I pray, I may be the best among contestants, like talasha, the best and highest among trees. 
1299 :This sukta is apparently on herbs, but it has also been interpreted in spiritual terms. This is to be kept in mind. 
1300 :moving, and yet refulgent all round, the power of the pleasure of your nectar is ecstatic, and that elixir we love to drink. 
1301 :Vihalha, the shaker, is your father, the father spirit which sustains and promotes all. M adavati, the pleasure power is your mother, the mother spirit which nourishes all. For sure they all know it. And that sustaining nourishment you are, you who preserve, protect and promote the body and soul. 
1302 :Inspire and promote us onward in the struggle of life for progress. This A ilaba, all over the earth, has advanced us. Babhru, the giver of vitality, and B abhrukarna, saviour of the people, pray come for our growth and bliss, Ala, powerful as you are. Nirala, disenergising, be off. 
1303 :foremost. Later you are Si I anjala, best in the home, and Niiagalasala, reaching unto every cell. 
1304 :Just as this great mother earth bears the seed of life forms, so may your womb bear the seed of life to mature and deliver the child. 
1305 :Just as this great mother earth bears these herbs and trees, so may your womb bear the seed of life to mature and deliver the child. 
1306 :Just as this great mother earth bears hills and mountains firmly, so may your womb firmly bear the seed of life to mature and deliver the child. 
1307 :Just as this great mother earth bears this vast and various world of existence on the move, so may yourwombfirmly and dynamically bear the seed of life to mature and deliver the child. 
1308 :O man, the first violence of your jealousy and that which repeats after the first, the torture of heart burn and the smouldering sorrow, all that we root out from the heart and soul. 
1309 :Just as the desert land void of fertility is lifeless at heart, nay even less than lifeless, and as the spirit of the man on death bed is worse than dead, so is the mind of the jealous man dead. 
1310 :And that small mind which still gasps for breath in your heart under the pressure of jealousy, from that I release your burning jealousy like hot air from the bellows and deflate the heat and oppression. 
1311 :May enlightened sages of divine vision lead me to purity of the spirit. May wise men of discrimination purify me in thought and action. May all living beings of the world inspire me to be pure at heart. May the Lord Supreme, all pure, immaculate and purifying, sanctify me in a state of purity. 
1312 :May the Supreme Lord of Purity, immacultate and purifying, purify and sanctify me for holiness of yajnic action, perfection of performance, noble living and a long life for the achievement, protection and expansion of all round well being for all. 
1313 :O divine Savita, lord of life and light, pray purify us all with both purity atheartwithin and creativeyajnic action in the open world for the sake of a vision of divinity. 
1314 :Like the heat of burning fire comes the attack of this intense fever, and while the patient is delirious and talks incoherently like one mad, it goes and returns. Let there be'namas' proper treatment for fever, and let the nasly fever go off, elsewhere, to some one not observing proper health care. Thus' homage' appropriate to the killer fever. 
1315 :Honour and salutations to Rudra, the physician, namah, i.e., proper treatment to the fever, homage to the refulgent Varuna, the sun which provides an umbrella of light and health. H omage to the heavenly regions of light, homage to the earth, thanks and proper study and research to the health giving herb and medicaments. 
1316 :O fever, intense and aglow like fire, which reduces all patients to pal lour and anaemia, to red and brown, I offer the homage of treatment and medication, for the wild fever. 
1317 :These three regions of space, earth, sky and the solar region: of these, earth is the best. From the surface of these three I collect medicinal essences for the light and lustre of life on earth. 
1318 :Of these herbs and essences, O Brahma, you are the best and highest, most bri 11 iant for rehabilitation of patients. Just as the moon is most glorious among stars and the sun is among the refulgents, so are you among herbs and trees for rehabilitation. 
1319 :O Revatis, stay inviolable and restore good health. Be strong and inviolable, stay healing. Give lustre of skin and beauty of hair, luxurious growth. Be that, strong and unassailable. (Revati is a herb which is a rejuvenating tonic for hair.) The supernal rays of the sun wearing vestments of vapour rise to the all attractive sun in heaven. Then they turn round and down from the regions of water and the earth is flooded with showers of rain. 
1320 :O M aruts, winds of the middle region, wearing golden garlands of power and splendour, when you blow you fill the vapours of water and herbs with blissful nectar sweets of sap and life energy, and, O manly M aruts, where you rain down the showers of honey sweets, there you flood the earth with energy and bless humanity with liberal understanding and wisdom. 
1321 :O M aruts, move the vapour laden clouds, the rain that f i 11 s al 11 akes and earthly depressi ons w i th w ater. The thunder of clouds shakes the atmosphere and streams flow to the sea as a lonely daughter goes to the parents' homeand a worried wife repairs to the husband and inspires him. (The symbolism suggests that the streams are, after all, children of the sea, and the showers are patronised by the sun and the sea.) I, seeker and performer of choice acti ons, i nvoke and pray for the divine gift of Karmic potential, that stream and shower of fluent karma which ceaselessly flows day and night in karmic streams of the flux of existence. 
1322 :May the divine streams of karma interwoven with the karmic flux of existence release me from personal involvement in this situation and help me to move on on the path of rectitude, and always enlighten and enable me to act and reach my divine destination. 
1323 :In this world of the creation of divine Savita, let people do their karma in the cosmic perspective, (without being prisoners of the ego in the personal situation), and may all streams of water and all herbs and trees, al I streams of the exi stenti al f I ow and al I i cons of light and wisdom be good and blissful to us across the world. 
1324 :The streams flow from the highest celestial home of snow. O glorious spirit, their end of theflow is in the bottomless sea. May those streams of the divine flow give me the bal m for peace of the heart's agitati on. 
1325 :Whatever pain in my eyes, heels and feet ails and agitates me, may the streams of water, most efficacious of sanatives eliminate, and pacify me. 
1326 :O streams of A pah, water and karma, that flow in the flux of existence, that sustain us by the glory of the cosmic ocean and shine and rule by the splendour of the infinite sea, pray give us that sanative peace of good health against that pain of agitation by which we may enjoy the beauty and pleasure of the flow without pain and suffering. 
1327 :Let all the five and fifty outgrowths and ailments of the neck which together afflict the patient be cured and disappear from here as words and wishes of ignorant fools disappear in the air. 
1328 :Let all the seven and seventy outgrowths and ailments of the throat which together afflict the patient be cured and disappear from here as words and wishes of ignorant fools disappear in the air. 
1329 :Let all the nine and ninety outgrowths and ailments of the shoulders which together afflict the patient be cured and disappear from here as words and wishes of ignorant fools disappear in the air. 
1330 :O evil, sin and wickedness of thought, will and emotion, be off, leave me to myself. O strength of mind, will and emotion, under control of the spirit, be good, give us peace and well being of life. O sinful disturbance, let me be in the state of natural goodness free from crookedness and suffering. 
1331 :O sinfulness, if you do not leave us, we destroy and eliminate you. W hen we are on the cross roads on the way onwards, then, O man, let the sin take another way and go off, elsewhere. 
1332 :Undying is evil as much as life itself. It has a thousand eyes to watch its victims. Let it be away from us and there proclaim itself. Whatever we hate, there let it be. O energy of sin, negative as you are, destroy the negativities that we hate. 
1333 :This is a very ambiguous, versatile sukta of positive as well as negative shades of meaning and i mpl icati ons. The theme hovers around three words: N i r- rti, Kapota, and Nishkrti. Nir-rti means adversity, destiny, disaster, and also constant state of truth and freedom. Kapota is messenger, pigeon bird said to have been trained and used as carrier of messages, warning, foreboding, and also a wise man of far sight, wisdom and imagination. Nishkrti means atonement, reparation, preparation, and also deliverance and freedom. 
1334 :Either way: If the message is that of adversity close at the door step, the response has to be preparati on. Also, if the message is a prelude to freedom and prosperity, the response has to be, again, preparation lest ambition overleap itself and has a fall like pride. 
1335 :O devas, enlightened men of generosity, here is the messenger of N ir-rti come sent by destiny, seeking for us to deliver the message. Let us welcome and honour him and the message and prepare for our response to acquit ourselves of our responsibility. May all be good for the well being of our people and for our animals. 
1336 :O devas, men of wisdom and imagination, may the messenger sent to us be harbinger of good for us. May the prognosis be a good omen, free from sin and evil for our home and family. May the Brahmana, like an enlightened leader, accept and be happy with our presentation of hospitality, astheyajnafire receives our oblation and joyously rises bright, and may he ward off the strike of all flying missiles. 
1337 :Let not the flying missile, daunt or deceive us. Let the messenger have a place in the assembly hall. Let every thing be good for our people and for our lands, cows and culture of freedom. O devas, leaders of light and wisdom, let not the messenger and the message any way injure our pride of honour and freedom. 
1338 :With proper words of praise and appreciation, urge upon the ambassador that, happy and rejoicing in our power and supplies of food and energy, with confidence and full power, we guide and rule our land and people. Thus avoiding references to undesirables but without omitting the assertion of our power and potential, let the messenger be sent back with a fitting reply. 
1339 :These people of our land have raised a force of brilliant people in their fields. They have raised the land, its standard of knowledge, culture and wealth high. They have made a place for themselves among the scholars and rulers of noble character over the earth. Who can then suppress and terrorize them? The one who, first and foremost among many, has risen to the highest position, the pioneer carving and showing the path of progress for many, who by virtue of such merit rules over the people and animals over the earth, to that leader and law giver of people unto life and death, all hail and homage. 
1340 :(This sukta, especially after the previous one, is a far reaching vision of modern challenges of egoistic power, the response of self-realised power, and ultimately a one-united-world of self-governing nations under one umbrella of the rule of righteousness and universal justice.) whose Uiuka, bird-like messenger, vasci 11 ates and speaks al I this that he speaks in vai n, or when the K apota, pigeonary clever messenger, puts his foot in the fire in the hall. 
1341 :O Nir-rti, adversity of will and intelligence, when those two messengers of yours, the one authorized and directed and the other unauthorized and undirected, one the Kapota, clever master of ambiguity, the other U luka, master of darkness and camouflage, cometo our land, our home would not be for them, beyond their reach. 
1342 :Let the messenger come but not for fall of the brave. Let the messenger come here but for the advancement of noble bravery. Otherwise go back to the distant land, cut a sorry figure and speak with a long face. In the house of the wise and men of judgement and leadership you would be judged as dull and irrelevant, a mere piece of clay in existence. 
1343 :The Devas, divinities of nature, created this yava, barley grain replete with honey as jewel on the stream of nature's flow, Sarasvati. Indra, the sun, creator of a hundred great things, was the ploughman, and the M aruts, generous winds, were the assistant farmers. (Shatapatha Brahmana describes yava as a drop of the moon's ecstasy: 4, 2,1, and 11) O Shami, exhilarating is your juice which gives a man long loose hanging and dishevelled hair by which you make the man smile with pleasure. I remove the plants growing close around so that you grow luxuriant with a hundred branches. 
1344 :O Shatavari Shami with large leaves, holy and generously rich, growing luxuriant by rains, pray be kind and efficacious for the growth of luxurious hair, gracious as a mother to the child. 
1345 :This moving earth, abiding by its mother, the atmospheric globe, and circumambulating itsfather, the bright sun, goes on and on in its orbit in space. 
1346 :(This mantra is a beautiful metaphor of the moving solar family. The sun is the father, the earth is child, and the globe of air and waters including the field of gravity is the mother. A nd this family of father, mother and child moves on and on in space in orbit. Another version, in Atharva-veda (20,48,4) translated by Pandit Satavalekara, interprets the metaphor as moon, the chi Id, earth the mother, and sun the father.) Thelightand power of thissun actively pervades in the systemic world of life breathing in and out with prana and apana energy, thereby reflecting and proclaiming the power and presence of this potent lord of life and light. 
1347 :Thirty solar hours (muhuratas) of day and of night does the sun constantly shine and illuminate the planets and satellites, and the holy tongue of the sages consonant with it celebrates this cosmic bird of life. 
1348 :(This sukta gives a vision of this world of stars, planets and satellites. There is nothing static, everything is on the move. Reference may also be made to Rgveda 5, 51, 15 where the sun and moon move in harmony, earth implied, for the good of humanity. They all move in order, each according to its own power. The sun being the highest in power is the centre. But what is the centre of all the solar systems and galaxies? Can it be physical? No, because if that physical object were the centre, what is it that sustains that? Hence the centre has to be nonphysical and yet most powerful, more powerful than any and all things physical. The Veda and Upanishad say that that centre is the cosmic spirit, smaller than the smallest and greater than the greatest: Anoraniyan mahato mahiyan (Kathopanishad 1, 2, 20), just a dimensionless point and yet the infinite transcendant. Reference may also be made to Yajurveda 23, 60, and Rgveda 1, 104, 4 and 9, 114, 3. It is that at the centre which spins this wheel of existence around and yet within itself (Shvetashvatara Upanishad 6,1.) O householders, offer this germ destroying havi with ghrta into the burning fire. O fire, burn and destroy the evil, polluting and life threatening germs from far and near, and do not cause any fire hazard to our homes. 
1349 :O blood sucking germs and insects, let Rudra, blazing fire of mid-day yajna, break your neck. O contagious evil doers, letthefire break the back of your resistance too. Let all round powerful herb of versatile efficacy join you with death. 
1350 :O M itra and Varuna, sun and air, sun and the physician, prana and apana energies of nature, let there be peace and security for us here. Force back the devitalizing and life threatening germs and insects. Let them find no intelligent ally, no stability, and let them, mutually conflictive and self-destroying, meet their death. 
1351 :O men and women of the world, boundless, beautiful and ecstatic is the glory of Indra, friend and commander of all in union, in whose power and dominion abides this world of existence, the earth, the greenery, the waters and the heaven of freedom and joy. 
1352 :The defeated dare not challenge, much less subdue, the might of potent and all victorious Indra. Indeed, as ever before, no tyrant can ever challenge the May Indra, most powerful ruler and sustainer of the people, give, give us all that wealth, honour and excellence which is beautiful as gold and inspiring and elevating as glory of the dawn. 
1353 :Raise your voice of prayer and adoration in honour of Agni, potent and generous lord ruler and sustainer of the people and worlds of existence, who may, we pray, shower us with wealth, honour and excellence beyond the reach of hate, jealousy and enmity. 
1354 :May Agni, who with his intense light, fire and splendour destroys evil and evil doers in nature and humanity, bring us showers of wealth, power and excellence beyond the reach of hate, jealousy and enmity. 
1355 :He who shines in splendour beyond the farthest of the far regions and spaces of existence, may, we pray, bless us with wealth, honour and excellence beyond the reach of all hate, jealousy and enmity. 
1356 :He that watches and overwatches all regions of the universe in and out, over and above, completely, may, wepray, bless uswith wealth, virtueand excellence beyond the reach of all jealousy, hate and enmity. 
1357 :ThatAgni, self refulgent, pure and immaculate, who manifests beyond the spaces of the universe may, we pray, bless us with the wealth of purity and excellence beyond the reach of all hate, jealousy and May Agni, life of the life of humanity, come from the highest heavens of light and listen and inspire our songs of adoration and prayer. 
1358 :May Vaishvanara Agni, leading light of the the lifeof theworld of humanity, constant and closestfriend, come and join our yajna, accept our songs of prayer and guide us at the most critical times of our need. 
1359 :May Vaishvanara Agni, leading light and life energy of all creative activities of theworld of humanity, energise, raise and fructify the adorable plans and holy actions of Angirasas pioneering thinkers, scientists and creative artists and lead them to success. May the light and life divine bring them honour, recognition and the bliss of self-fulfilment in success without any frustration. 
1360 :The Lord Supreme, ordainer and sustainer of the truth and reality of existence, leading light of humanity, protector and promoter of the light of law and yajnic evolution of natural and human karma, eternal and unaging spiritand passion of lifefor creative action, we invoke, adore and exalt in yajna. 
1361 :That VaishvanaraAgni, universal controller and energiser, pervades, inspires and fructifies every thing, every person and every effort in the world, and blesses all seasons with higher vitality and power, all the time raising the creative success of natural and human action for evolution and development. 
1362 :Agni, the love, the lover and giver of fulfilment for and of all that is past and present and that which is yet to be, self-refulgent presence, rules over all and pervades even the farthest borders of the expansive universe, the sole lord, one, unique, matchless, without a second presence such as Agni Itself. 
1363 :Letthe divine force of love and truth, thousandeyed, all vigilant, come as protection against cursed ill- will, having yoked itschariotagainstill will, execration and hate. Let it search out and destroy the imprecation and the imprecator like a wolf pouncing upon a sheepfold. 
1364 :O curse, burning I ike fire drying a pool of water, leave us. O protective chariot of divinity, destroy the curse and the cursor as the strike of thunder from above destroys the tree from its very root. 
1365 :Whoever curses us who do not curse anybody, and whoever curses us even though we too may revile the curse, we throw off that insufferable curse unto death, i.e., to naught, as we throw a piece of bone to a dog. 
1366 :That energy, brilliancy and splendour which is in the lion, tiger, cobra, fire, the Brahmana, and in the sun, which, divine spirit of majesty and good fortune, creates and consecrates the ruling power, Indra, may, we pray, come bearing the lustre and splendour of life and bless us. 
1367 :That grace and majesty which is in the elephant, that strength and agility inthetiger, the grace and beauty in gold, the generosity in the cows and virility in men, that light and splendour of life, the divine spirit of majesty and good fortune which creates and consecrates the ruling power, Indra, may that divine brilliance come bearing the lustre of life and bless us. 
1368 :The strength, brilliance and efficiency in the chariot, chariot wheel and endurance of the bull, the force in the wind, the shower in the cloud and blaze in the light of the sun, the divine light and splendour which creates and consecrates the ruler Indra, may all that brilliance bearing the grandeur of life come and bless us. 
1369 :The light and lustre in the ruling power, the inspiring boom in the tensioned war drum, the agility i n the strength and endurance of the war horse, the heroic self-confidence in man's wondrous manliness, that divine light, splendour and majesty of life which creates, consecrates and confirms the ruling power, Indra, may come to us, bearing the lustrous grandeur of life, and bless us. 
1370 :Let our yajna and our honour and fame increase Indra-inspired, thousandfold strong, well controlled, created and achieved through courage, confidence and patience. O Lord omnipotent, pray promote me, bearing havi in homage, prayerful and ambitious for advancement, raise me for a long life of vision and wisdom and bless me to rise to the highest position. 
1371 :Well and holily, bearing havi in homage for our good, we worship Indra, lord of glory, sublime by his divine grandeur and majesty. May he give us a great Indra-inspired Rashtra, a dominion of freedom and prosperity. O Lord, may we too rise to fame and excellence by your grace and generosity. 
1372 :Glorious is Indra, lord of power. Glorious is Agni, light and fire of life. Glorious is Soma, the moon, spirit of peace and beauty. Of all the glorious things of the world, let me rise to the most excellent position by the grace of Indra, Agni and Soma, light, peace and power. 
1373 :Abhayam dyavaprthivi ihdstu no ’bhayam someth savitd ncth krnotu. Abhayam no ’sturvantarikssarh saptarsinam ca havisabhayam no astu. 
1374 :O heaven and earth, let there be freedom from fear for us here. May Soma, divine spirit of peace, and Savita, lord creator and inspirer give us the gift of fearlessness. Let the wide sky and space be free from fear for us, and may there be total freedom from fear for us by yajnic dedication of the seven sages. 
1375 :(The seven sages are five organs of perception, mind and intelligence, because they help us to 'see' and know. Further all the divinities mentioned and invoked in this sukta are objective 'organs' of divinity as well as inside our persoality : The sun is in the eye, moon in the mind, space quarters in the ear, vayu orwind in the skin, agni in the speech, apah in thetaste, earth in the solidity of thebody, and light region inthebrain. So right action by the person with the body system and the external divinities of nature are related. Our action through our organs creates vibrations of cause and effect in nature which affects us too. 
1376 :Hence prayer to the divinities for freedom from fear implies that we too have to act without violating the laws of nature and of humanity. Life within and life outside both are organismically related. Prayer implies action too.) For this community of ours, in all the four quarters of space, may Savita create energy, ample wealth and well being and may Indra, the ruler, create fearlessness and freedom from enemies. The fear and anger of the rulers, then, may go elsewhere (where lawlessness might be prevailing). 
1377 :May I ndra create for us I ove and freedom from enemies from down below on earth, love and freedom from enmity from above, love and freedom from enemies from behind, and love with freedom from fear, opposition, conflict and enmity upfront. 
1378 :For the development of mind, intelligence, thought, intention and purpose, understanding, wisdom, hearing and vision, we worship Indra, Lord Almighty, with offers of havi in yajna. 
1379 :For the vitality of apana, vyana, all sustaining prana, and for wide ranging knowledge, we worship Agni, light of life with offers of havi in yajna. 
1380 :May the divine senses of perception and volition, those powers which nourish and sustain our body, those that are born of our body system, never forsake us. May the immortal divinities ever abide with us, the mortals. May they nourish and sustain us and give us good health and long age for a happy life. 
1381 :I relax the tension of anger from your mind like rel easing the string from the bow so that you and I, being good and happy at heart, may live together like friends. 
1382 :I relax the tension of anger and passion from your mind so that we may live together as happy friends. Your anger is intense and oppressive, we cast and bury it down under a heavy stone. 
1383 :With a kick and under the heel, I cast down and bury your anger so that you are one and calm at heart with me and do not talk like one possessed. 
1384 :This 'darbha' grass is the tranquilizer of anger for our own people and for others high or low. This is called pacifier of the angry man's passion and fury. 
1385 :This darbha grass which is deep rooted grows close to the sea. Growing and rising from the earth and rising high, it is called pacifier of the passion and fury of anger. 
1386 :We remove the angry distortions on your chin and face so that your mind is equal and tranquil with mine and you would not talk like one possessed. 
1387 :The solar region is firm and undisturbed it stands. The earth stands firm and still, undisturbed. This entire cosmos is firm and undisturbed. The high standing trees, dreaming and sleeping, stand still. Let this malady too stand still, it must not aggravate. 
1388 :Hundred are your medicines, a thousand their supplements and substitutes. The best of them is Brahma which stops bleeding, and that is the cure of the malady. 
1389 :You are the shower of the cloud, you are the centre and concentration of the sanative nectar. You are Vishanaka by name, a sure cure of genetic ailments and those caused by wind disorder. 
1390 :Go off, evil of the mind, why do you present things undesirable? Keep off. I do not want you. Gad about woods and trees. M y mind is in and with the home and homely thoughts and perceptions. 
1391 :W hatever sins we have committed whether out of jealousy, or hate or callousness and enmity while awake or asleep, consciously or unconsciously, may Agni, light of life, ward off and keep away all those undesirable thoughts and deeds of the world from us. 
1392 :O lord of universal power, Indra, O lord of Infinity, Brahmanaspati, whatever wrong or sinful we commit in life, in our thought and behaviour, may Pracheta, lord of knowledge and giver of self-awareness, Angirasa, giver of living vibrancy of life, protect us against that evil and save us from sin. 
1393 :O dream you are neither alive, i.e., in the living state of wakefulness, nor dead, i.e., in the state of deep sleep. You are the immortal child of the senses and mind in the dream state. 
1394 :O dream, we know your origin. You are the product of mind and senses and things related to them in psychic association. You are the instrument of the psychic laws of life. As dream, you can be the end, harbinger of the end, a premonition, death itself. So O dream, we know as and what you are. O dream, save us from evil dreams. (Come at your best if at all.) Just as people pay one sixteenth or one eighth of the principal and get free of the loan, so do we pay back for the dream: take back the evi I ones and I et these be share of the evil (we wish to get rid off). 
1395 :May Agni, self-refulgent, universal guide, all creative, all-blissful divine Spirit of the universe, purify us at the morning session of yajna. May the fiery sanctifier establish us in wealth, honour and excellence of the world, and may we all together, living happy and healthy, enjoy the beauty of life. 
1396 :May theVishvedevas, cosmic divinities, M aruts, cosmic energies and vibrant sages, and Indra, lord omnipotent of glory, join us withoutfail and bless us at this second session of the day's yajna. And may we all, living together happy and healthy, speaking together, enjoy the love and good will of these divinities together. 
1397 :At this third session of the day's yajna of the poetic sageswho raise and elevate the ladle of havi with truth for light and life's joy, may those heroic masters of the bow who enjoy the bliss of heavenly light lead our holy performance of yajna to noble success. 
1398 :Lord of holy fire, you are the Eagle, highest all- impelling power and force of existence, ecstatic protective spirit of life's beauty and joy. In consonance with your love and worship I begin this sacred yajna of life in which, I pray, graciously lead me to the blessed completion of this yajna. This is the voice of prayer in truth of faith. 
1399 :You are the master spirit of cosmic action, committed to joyous protection of the moving threefold world. In pursuit of your grace and glory, I begin this yajna in which, I pray, lead me to the completion of this yajna to noble success. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
1400 :joyous well being of the spiritual, psychic and material fulfilment of this world of humanity. I n tune with your power and generosity, I begin this yajna of life in which, I pray, lead me to the completion with noble success. This is the voice of truth in faith. 
1401 :This sukta should better be read with Gita, chapter 11, especially verses 24-32. 
1402 :O lord self-refulgent, Agni, no mortal man can comprehend the inexorable dynamics of your creative manifestation in the universe—your spirit in form through the medium of Prakrti.TheSun devours its own blaze of light. Nature consumes its own creation, like the cow eating up its own embryo's outer skin. 
1403 :Like the cloud's mist of vapours, Agni's nature with its inexorable dynamics contracts and expands without bounds, withdrawing and manifesting on top of its organismic body and yet even beyond the top above. It expands at the top such as Sattva by sattva and the fluent Rajas by rajas, shooting forth as well as destroying or sucking in the ensuing filaments, and thus itconsumes its own created forms with its involutionary media. 
1404 :The centrifugal radiations of dynamic nature create articulate vibrations in the ethereal regions of the heaven's space. Vigorous centripetal forces enact their dance of joyous creation of forms. These forces carry on the formal evolution and devolution of the Supercreator's purposeful dynamics of nature, all the time dependent on the creative Sun at the centre. 
1405 :O farming men and women, Ashvins, drive off the crop destroyer, the burrowing mouse and other crop damagers, break their head, break their back. See that they do not destroy the barley crop. Shut their mouth, and thus eliminate the fear of damage to the crop. 
1406 :O damaging bird, O creeping insect, dangerous, w orth el i mi nati on, j ust as the priest I eaves aside the havi not properly prepared, similarly you also leave the barley fields undamaged and go away. 
1407 :O gurads of the crops against damagers, locusts, voracious insects, listen to me: whether the damagers are voracious destroyers of the forest-kind or they stay around the fields, voracious damagers ail, we must eliminate all. 
1408 :Soma, purified and reinforced by the pure energy of Vayu, becomes doubly refined and purified, immediate favourite of Indra. (Similarly a man of peace and pure at heart, refined by the divine presence and purity of all vibrant God, becomes doubly pure and fortified against negativity and evil, and he becomes a favourite friend of Divinity.) Let the holy waters, sacred as mother powers, cleanse, chasten and fortify us. They are pure, they may sanctify us with the purity of piety and refinement. They wash away the dirt and evil of the world, they being divine. Purified, sanctified and consecrated by these, I go on forward, higher and higher. 
1409 :O Varuna, lord of infinite cover of protection, whatever wrong or evil or sin people commit out of jealousy, hate or enmity toward noble and divine personalities, or whatever violation of your law and Dharma we too, out of ignorance or want of care and awareness, might commit, pray hurt as not, O Lord Divine, for that fault and sin. 
1410 :Up arises the sun from the regions of light in theeastfrom over the mountains and clouds, destroying the negativities of physical and mental world seen and unseen. 11 is A ditya, self-refulgent, inviolable, activating and recei vi ng vapours of water and vital iti es of the earth, visible to all the world without discrimination. (This is the morning scene.) The cows are settled in the stall, wild beasts are back to their pi ace, the waves and ri ppl es of the streams are invisible, covered in darkness. (This is the evening scene after sunset.) I bear, bring and cherish the universal medication, giver of lifeenergy, inspirer of intellect and understanding, reputed, favourite sanative of the versatile sage, which may, I pray, cure all visible and invisible ailments of this patient. 
1411 :(This sukta, thus, is a celebration of the efficacy of sunlight from morning till evening, including, we can say, the soothing night and light of the moon.) May heaven and earth, both inspiring stimulants of knowledge and awareness, both father and mother, source givers of knowledge, the sun and vital living energy, and the expansive space, all bless me with their gifts of life. May Soma, the moon and the blessed peace of nature, Agni, life energy, omniscient God and the brilliant teacher, Vayu, cosmic wind and pranic energy, Savita, lord creator, and Bhaga, lord giver of the glory of life, protect and promote me and lead me to knowledge and all round awareness in accordance with (This mantra obviously is a prayer for natural and divine protection during this life, but there are certain words which suggest that it is a prayer, for life and efficiency during the next life too. The words are 'dyau, prthivi': Prthivi is mother and dyau is father according to Taittiriya Brahmana 2, 7, 16, 3. Another word is 'Shukra' which means the seed of life as in Yajurveda 21, 34 and 6, 27, and in Rgveda 3, 6, 3.) Again let pranic energy come to us, again let the soul along with the psychic complex come to us, again the eye, and again the life energy come to us. Vaishvanara, cosmic spirit of watchful life over humanity, undaunted protector of our life and body against all evils and negativities of the world abides at the very centre of our being. (The word 'again' is explained by Swami Dayananda as 'again in this life or in the next birth' in his commentary on Yajurveda 4, 15.) Let us go on united with honour and lustre, with nourishment for body, mind and soul, with body and limbs in perfect form, and with a mind at peace. May Tvashta, divine architect of body forms, make us better and higher, and cleanse and purify whatever part of our being is wanting. 
1412 :I join this and that, the ruler and the higher Rashtra, the socio-governing order, and I refine and anoint the ruler for higher attainments for the Order. O Lord Omnipotent of this cosmic order, I pray, raise his ruling order, his glory, and the splendour of the Order, as rain augments the growth of grass. 
1413 :O sun and moon, spirit of light, fire and peace of life, bear, sustain and glorify the dominion for the ruler, bear and bring wealth, honour and excellence for this order, establish this ruler in the class of exceptional greats and this way I commit him to rise higher and higher. 
1414 :O Lord Omnipotent, lord of light, fire and peace, whoever, whether with kith and kin and a hoard of supporters, or without kith and kin and committed supporters, tries to violate our order and enslave us, pray subdue him wholly and overthrow him for the sake of our leader of the yajnic social order, the leader and ruler dedicated to creative rule and rise of the social order, its peace, joy and glory. 
1415 :O divinities of the world, of all those many paths worthy of devas, divine souls, which are nobly and actively followed over earth and heaven, take me and commit me to that sole one, the best, which leads us to a world of peace and progress without violence to any one. 
1416 :O Vishvedevas, divinities of the world, lead us and establish us in a state of peace and progress with total well being and prosperity throughout the year over the seasons of summer, cold winter, cool winter, spring, autum and rains. Share with us the gifts of lands and cows among a peaceful progressive community and, under your leadership and protection, let us enjoy a life of peace and happiness without any winds of violence and disturbance. 
1417 :For the first, second, and indeed for every year throughout the twelve months and three hundred and sixty days of every year in a planned cycle of five years, produce ample food and wealth and do honour to the parent, the teacher, and the ruling order of law and peace, and let us live in their love and goodwill and enjoy the blessings of people dedicated to creative and developmental yajna of the nation. 
1418 :O Vishvedevas, learned people and specialists, let no snake bite us and kill us, living with our children and our people in general. Let it not open its mouth if it is closed, let it not close its mouth if it is open. H onour and sal utati ons to the noble I earned people for the safety of life. 
1419 :Let there be unfailing measures and antidotes to the cobra, unfailing antidote to the snake striped across, unfailing antidote to the viper, constrictor and the deep brown, honour and salutations to the noble, learned masters of knowledge and antidotes to snakes, snake bite and snake poison. 
1420 :I break your teeth with the tooth, O snake, your jaws with thejaw, yourtonguewith thetongueand your mouth with the mouth. 
1421 :This is the sure cure, this is the medicine prescribed by Rudra, the physician, by which the arrow with a single shaft and the arrow with a hundred shafts is drawn out and the wound is cured. 
1422 :Wash the wound all round with water medication, wash it on and in with water medication. Jalasha, the medicinal water, is very intense in action. O physician, be kind and gracious with intense J alasha for a long healthy life. 
1423 :Let there be peace and comfort with us. Let there be health and joy with us. Let nothing ail or injure us. Let there be freedom from sin and pain. Let life and the world be a sanative for us. Let all and every thing be giver of health and freedom from ailment and disease, balmy, healthful, pleasurable. 
1424 :May Indra, lord of glory, bless me with honour and glory, and so may both these earth and heaven, make me glorious. May Savita, lord of light and life, bless with honour and glory. May I be the dear favourite of the giver of glory here on earth itself. 
1425 :regions of heaven and earth, just as waters and all other liquid divinities are glorious for their gift of sap amog herbs and trees, similarly may we also be honoured and glorious among all the sources of generosity and brilliance in the noble humanity. 
1426 :Indra is glorious. Agni is glorious. Soma is glorious. O lord of glory, bless me that I may be blest with highest honour and glory among all living beings of the world. 
1427 :O Arundhati, give peace and comfort of good health first to the cow and the bullock, and give health and peace for life to all the quadrupeds other than the cow. 
1428 :Let divine Arundhati along with other divine herbs give health and peace to the animals and thus make the stall overflow with milk, and let it make humanity also free from consumptive diseases such as tuberculosis. 
1429 :I value and welcome A rundhati, the auspicious, rejuvenating herb of versatile efficacy curative of all forms of ailments and pray may the herb help us keep away the attack of diseases caused by neglect of precautions prescribed by the physician, Rudra, and may the herb help us keep off disease from cows as well. 
1430 :H ere upfront comes A ryama, this adorable sun, person, the friend, desirous of getting a husband for this virgin, and a wife for this bachelor. 
1431 :('A ryama' in this mantra is an interesting word, interpreted as sun, a friend or any person such as the bridegroom's or the bride's friend, conducting the bridegroom to the bride or the bride to the bridegroom. If we insist that A ryama is the sun, then sun is the vital giver of life energy which has led the bridegroom to maturity of virility, and the girl to maturity of puberty. If we interpret 'A ryama' as the 'seeker and conductor' of the bride or the bride groom, we would of appreciate the tradition, celebrated in secular literature, of the 'messenger-conductor' between the lover and the beloved. In choice-cum-arranged marriages, A ryama could be a parent, a teacher, a friend or any other person, a friend-cum-advisor, a confidant too.) O Aryaman, going to thewedding of other girls, this virgin has waited and consciously prepared herself for marriage. Therefore, O Aryaman, dear, let others too come and join the wedding of this virgin. 
1432 :The creator holds and sustains the earth mother, the creator holds and sustai ns the heavens and the father sun. So, may the lord creator and sustainer bless this virgin with a husband in response to her cherished desire. 
1433 :For me, to my purpose and self-fulfilment, for my self-manifestation, let the dynamics of Nature flow, bearing the honey sweets of existence. For me does the sun bear and bring thejoy of lifeand lightfortheworld to see. For me do all divinities of the world born of cosmic will through tapas, the crucibles of evolution, act in unison, and for me does Savita, cosmic creativity, create, hold and sustain the expansive universe. 
1434 :(For Tapas, divine heat and desire of Lord Supreme, Parameshvara, see Rgveda 10, 190, and Shatapatha 6,1, 3,1: The flow of existence starts with tapas, will of the Surpeme Purusha.) the seven united flows of N ature: five elements and the two orders of sense, i. e., senses of perception and action; seven orders of the worlds of the universe from B hu to Satyam; seven seasons; seven lights of the sun, seven orders of wind and rain, and the seven seas. I speak of whatistrueand of what is not true and the eternal Word of the Veda for all people of the world. 
1435 :I create the heaven and earth. I create the seven seasons and the seven orders of the flow and the flux of existence, and the seven rivers and the seven seas. I speak of what is true and what is not true, and I join Agni and Soma, hot and cold, positive and negative complementarities in the cosmic circuit of existence. 
1436 :May Vaishvanara, universal lord of humanity, the sun and the cosmic heat of vitality, benefactor of humanity, purify us with the rays of light and divine knowledge. May the winds inspiring with pranic energy and the cool of clouds purify and rejuvenate us. May adorable heaven and earth dedicated to the truth of cosmic law and overflowing with nutriments of living energy rejuvenate and purify us. 
1437 :Love, join and live by the universal human voice of Divinity and cosmic truth, the bounds of whose body are boundless. With that, celebrating and exalting ourselves and D i vi nity i n festive congregati ons of yaj ni c programmes, may we be masters of wealth, honour and excellence. 
1438 :Love, join and live by the cosmic voice of universal truth for humanity for the achievement of the lustre, splendour and glory of life, being thereby pure, sanctified and consecrated sanctifiers. Then, thereby, enjoying, celebrating and exalting ourselves and Divinity in yajnic congregations with songs of Vedic voice, may we rise for all time and see the sun, light of Divinity, rising higher and higher without end. 
1439 :O man, the bond of nescience and death which natural Destiny ordained by Divinity hashed round your neck, unrelinquishable otherwise, I, Agni, teacher, loosen and help you to drop off. Now, born again, go ahead, take and enjoy thefood of knowledge and divine vision far beyond the pleasures of the material world for life, lustre and your divine potential of the spirit, which you essentially are. 
1440 :O Nir-rti, nescience and natural destiny, last homage to you! O lord of light, Agni, pray loosen and untie the iron shackles of bondage which Yama, lord of natural law, imposes on me again and again, for which reason, O Yama, homage to you also for release from the bonds of death. 
1441 :O man, bound in iron shackles, tied to the wooden post of natural life, you are imprisoned here by death in a thousand ways. O Agni, lord of light, you know, being one with the realities of parental procreation and Yama, natural law, as well as Yama, ultimate divine Ordainer. Pray help this man to break the shackles and rise to the highest heaven of freedom. 
1442 :O Ruler of the earthly world and the light of heaven, Agni, giver of infinite showers of bliss, you join all the elements of nature and life together, lead humanity to break the shackles of bondage and help them join the ultimate freedom of M oksha. You are lighted and worshipped on the earthly vedi of yajna by the seekers of Divinity. Pray bring us showers of wealth, honour and excellence of earthly life and lead us to the highest heaven of freedom and bliss. 
1443 :K now well and together, join together and well, completely, without reservation, join at heart, know all your minds well and increase your knowledge together, the way the divines of old joined, knew and performed well, observing their Dharma of rights and duties integrated. 
1444 :Let your mantra, thinking, discussion and decision in the light of your joint principles together be one and equal for all. Let your assembly be one and equal for all. Let your discipline and commitment be one and equal for all with perfect union at heart in depth. 
1445 :I love and vest you with equal vestments of life and knowledge, so that with one mind on equal terms you enter the field of life. 
1446 :Let your intention, resolution and destination be one and equal. Let your hearts be one in unison. Let your mind and understanding be one united so that you may be happy and advancing together to the one common goal. 
1447 :Let anger be off. Let the bow drawn be down. Let the two arms raised with passionate mind be down. O mighty archer, down and destroy the strength of the enemies and do honour and win the wealth of creditfor us. 
1448 :(This mantra suggests 'war' upon the enemies outside and the enemies within, both to be fought out when anger is calmed, the drawn bow is eased of tension, the passions are cooled, but the archer, soulful commander, is strong in the essential self. Such a victory without anger and passion brings the wealth of credit for man, victorious over the unhuman.) O Devas, noble warriors, the disarming arrow which you shoot upon the disarmed, that is the yajnic havi material by which I disarm the might of the enemies. 
1449 :Indra, supreme ruler of life, created and designed the first and highest armless disarming weapon against the negative and demonic forces of the world. May my enlightened warriors win their battles of life under the leadership of Indra, the Spirit inviolable, immovable, steadfast. 
1450 :(The battle that rages is between the positive and the negative forces without the search for balance and evolution. So it rages on, doesn't end. The ultimate weapon of ultimate victory is the constructive, reconstructive and rejuvenating yajnic fragrance of love and indefatigable spirit of union and brotherhood.) Let the enemy advancing and seeking to enslave us be disarmed. O Indra, deal with those with great unfailing thunderbolt who strike their weapons against uswith mighty forces. Let their sinful leader, transfixed and defeated, withdraw and run away. 
1451 :O enemies who came advancing against us, your bows raised, strings drawn, shooting arrows upon us, lay down your arms and stay. Indra today has shattered your might. 
1452 :Let the enemies stand disarmed. We break their force and render their weapons ineffective. And then, O lord victorious, Indra, let us value, honour and share their knowledge and positive achievements a hundred ways. 
1453 :Let Indra, the ruling power, and Pusha, power of maintenance and supply, keep vigilanceand all-ways fortify the paths and points of entry into the dominion so that all the infiltrative forces of the enemies feel confused and terrified, retreat and keep off. 
1454 :Let the enemies be away and move around, stupefied like snakes whose head is crushed, and let Indra pick out the chief ones of them confused by fiery missiles and eliminate them. 
1455 :brave and strike the encroachers and i ntruders w ith fear so that the enemy runs away and our lands and properties are recovered and safely defended. 
1456 :This diligent barber, savita, has come with the razor. O man, come fast with water. Let brilliant, wise and noble people with love at heart bless the child with holy water. O men of love and peace with the generosity of soma, join at the shining child's tonsure ceremony. 
1457 :Let the razor cut the hair. Let water consecrate the child with brilliance. Let Prajapati enlighten the child and bless him to have a long age of good health, knowledge and holy vision. 
1458 :B y the process the expert barber has shaved the head of the shining, loving and intelligent child with the razor, by the same ceremonial process, O Brahmanas, pray complete the tonsure ceremony of the child. May this child be rich in lands, cows and horses and may he have a noble family. 
1459 :The beauty, grace and splendour that is in the mountain and the valley, in gold, in cows and theflowing streams, and the honey sweetness that is in food, may that be in me too. 
1460 :O Ashvins, complementary harbingers of the beauty, sweetness and graces of life, beatify me with the honey sweet of the music of the bees so that I may speak the brilliant resonant voice of divine Vedic revelation to the people. 
1461 :May Prajapati bless me with lustre, honour and the nectar inspiration of yajna and raise and confirm me in honour like light in heaven. 
1462 :As food and drink are concentrated in the pleasure garden, as dice on the gambling table, or as the mind of the exuberant lover is concentrated on his wife, so may your love, O inviolable cow, be concentrated on your calf. 
1463 :Just as an elephant goes forward by the footsteps of the she-elephant, as the mind of the exuberant lover is centred on his wife, so may your loyalty, O inviolable people, be dedicated to the universal personality of the land and its culture and tradition. 
1464 :Just as the felly, the spokes, the axle and the hub, all are joined and concentrated within the circumference of the felly, as the mind of the exuberant lover is centred on his wife, so may your mind and purpose, O inviolable speech, be dedicated to the all immanent, all-comprehensive and transcendent presence of Supreme Brahma. 
1465 :Whatever food I eat, of many forms in many ways, whatever I have received in the form of gold, horses, cows, goats and sheep, whatever I have received and given in exchange, may Agni, Almighty performer of cosmic yajna, turn all that into the yajnic mode of consumption and fragrant production in the service of Divinity and accept it as homage. 
1466 :Whatever I have come by, whether offered by others or not, i.e., produced by me, whether given to me by parents and earlier generations and approved by wise people, by which my mind waxes and shines with pleasure and excitement, mayAgni,Almighty performer of cosmic yajna, turn all that into the yajnic mode of consumption and fragrant production in the service of Divinity and accept it as homage. 
1467 :O Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, whatever food I eat un-naturally, even by false understanding of the truth of life and consume with or even without the desire and purpose of giving, may all that food and consumption be good and honey sweet for me ultimately, by the grandeur and grace of Almighty Vaishvanara, gracious lord of humanity and its participation in cosmic yajna. 
1468 :(This sukta recognises and celebrates human potential and its limitations in performance which is done in a mood of grateful surrender. It also enjoins that with all our potential and limitations we must perform yajna as a symbol of our creative purpose and also as an exercise in prayer for grace and acceptance.) Just as the Lord Creator of boundless will and freedom creates, designs, builds and expands the bodies of creatures by the immanent will and intelligence of nature, so may the divine natural process shape and build your organs strong and virile in proportion to the strength of all other parts of the body. 
1469 :O ruler, just as parts of the body are built and grow strong by the energy of nature, and the dominion of a ruler is expanded and strengthened by the strength and endeavour of the people, so let your body politic grow as far as that of any other strong and perfect ruler. 
1470 :As far as the constituent parts of the dominion of any other successful ruler are extended and strengthened by the voice of the people and possible of the arms of the constituted system, so may the dominion of the virile and dynamic ruler grow and expand in freedom and prosperity. 
1471 :(In the Veda, the universe is described as a Purusha, a living, breathing, intelligent, self-organising, organismic sovereign system: Rgveda 10,90; yajurveda 31; A tharva-veda 19,6. A nd the system is correspondent at the micro as well as the macro level. The single individual is E karat, the social system is Samrat, and the cosmic system is Vi rat. Tthere is another Purusha also, the sanyasins, free and uninvolved with mundane problems: they are the Pari-vrat Purusha. In this sukta, the correspondency between the E karat or micro-system (mantra 1) and the social system, Samrat, between the individual and the cosmos, is descri bed. Just as a healthy individual body is constituted of healthy and strongly working parts, so the social body of a united dominion upto the international level is constituted of healthy and strongly functional parts.) Let Varuna, spirit of justice, wisdom and enlightenment, Soma, spiritof peace, inspiration, beauty and grace, Agni, spirit of fiery leadership, Brhaspati, spirit of the knowledge and boundless vision, all these come and join herewith the settled people of the world. Let all people of the world, equally and nobly born, one and equal in mind and united in will and purpose, come and join the beauty, grace and glory of this vi brant, brilliant and enlightened social order of the world of humanity. 
1472 :All the strength and power which is in your hearts, and all thoughts, intentions and purposes enshrined in your mind, with all these I lead you to sew yourselves together into a common united fabric, and I sprinklethis united vedi with the ghrta and fragrant havi of yajna, the one divine purpose of creative humanity. O people of the world, all equal in brotherhood, let all your love, interests and ambitions be united and centred into me. 
1473 :Be here, stay here together, go not away from us. Let Pusha, the spirit of life, sustenance and growth together, rule out separation from our united system and declare it out of bounds. Letthe architect of the universal home of humanity keep you joined together and maintain the cohesive pressure from within with constant sense of urgency. O people of the world, all equal in brotherhood, let all your love, interests and ambitions be united and centred into me, heart of the Samrat Purusha. 
1474 :O people of the world, be united together in body, mind and soul, and in all your commitments of values and disciplines of universal Dharma. May the omnipresent B rahmanaspati, I ord of i nf i nite know I edge, and Bhaga, lord giver of honour, excellence and glory lead you and keep you committed to unity and united action. 
1475 :The harmony and unity of your mind, the harmony and unity of your hearts, and the ultimate command of Bhaga, spirit of glory and prosperity that there is, with ail these I enlighten and harmonize you. 
1476 :Just as self-refulgent blazing stars join and go with the planets and currents of energy without reservation, similarly Trinaman, lord of three worlds and three phases of time, without anger, disapproval and reservation, make these people of the earth, equal and united at heart and in the mind and soul. 
1477 :Indra, ruler of the dominion, drive off from the homeland the enemy that marches upon us with his forces. The ruler should drive off and destroy such enemy with the inviolable treatment that he deserves. 
1478 :Let Indra, destroyer of darkness and demonic enmity, drive off that enemy to the farthest place so that for all times to come he can never come back again. 
1479 :Let the enemy go off beyond the three, his name, place and position, beyond the five peoples, beyond the three lights of sun, moon and knowledge, so that from there he never comes back for all times to come as long as the sun shines in heaven. 
1480 :Agni, well lighted within, rises in flames and shines in and over their hearts who light the sacred fire of divinity with love and faith, sit round it and meditate Forthesakeof good life, health and joy, I know, love and meditate on the light of the fire of physical, mental and spiritual discipline whose fragrant fumes rising from the vedi, the sage sees in deep meditation. 
1481 :Whoever knows the light and fire of this Agni, collected and realised by heroic souls of meditative discipline in life, never puts his foot into the slough of death and despondency. 
1482 :The enemies, which surround the heroic soul that knows and internalises the power of Agni for health and life, cannot hurt and destroy him. Nor does he, strong as he is, recognise their presence or dangerous val ue against hi m. The K shatriya who wears the armour The sun is stable in its own place. The earth is stable in its own place. This entire dynamic universe is stable in its own state. The mountains abide in their own places. I have stabilised my 'horses', i.e., senses and mind and pranic energies, in their own places and functions. 
1483 :He that masters, controls and protects the centrifugals, he that masters, controls and protects the centripetals, who sustains the going-away's and the coming-in's, who masters, controls and protects birth and rebirth, life and death, all that is and moves and yet in place in a steady state, that master protector manager of all, I invoke and adore. 
1484 :O Jataveda, lord omnipresent and omniscient, arise and manifest into my consciousness, hundreds be your reflections and revisits. Thousands be your manifestations in the soul. With these returns and reflections, pray bless us again and again. Let the divine circuit go on. 
1485 :Let this couple grow to prosperity by the liberal havi they offer into the home yajna, let it grow continuously. Let thewifethat the community hasgiven to the husband, let her too grow by love in the family. 
1486 :Let the husband and wife grow with delicious food and drink and conjugal felicity by the inspiring state of the social order. Let the couple grow by a thousand fold wealth and lustre of honour without any set back ever. 
1487 :O man, Tvashta, lord maker of beautiful humanity and institutions, created this woman for you as wife and for her he made you, the husband. May the same lord Tvashta bless you with long life and provide all means and lustrous energy for happy living. 
1488 :May the lord of expansive space waxing with the expansive universe protect us and promote wealth and wisdom of exceptional order in our homes. 
1489 :O Lord of the realms of light and glory, bring energy of life into our homes, let growth come, let wealth, home, excellence and peace and stability come to us. 
1490 :O lord self-refulgent of inexhaustible existence, you are the ruler and ordainer of a thousandfold abounding prosperity and growth. G ive us plenty of that. Bear that and bring us in plenty. Pray give us the gift of devotion and dedication to you. 
1491 :The power, the glory and the bliss of heaven showers from high above, watching all things in existence. O Lord of light and bliss, the glory that is yours, with the homage of songs to that glory, we worship you. 
1492 :Those three orders of the lord of time, heat, light and wind, agni, sun and vayu, that abide in the heavenly regions like divinities, I invoke them for the protection and well being of this humanity. 
1493 :O lord of light and bliss, you pervade and roll i n the waters of space and i n acts of nature and humanity, you pervade and abide in the light of the sun, your grandeur is in the depths of the ocean and in the beauty of the earth. O lord of light and bliss, the glory that is yours, with the homage of songs to that glory, we worship you. 
1494 :You are a man of principle and conjugal discipline. You give the support of both your hands to your wife. You ward off all evils and disturbing intrusions. You are the winner of wealth and giver of support to the family. May this supportive hand be always extended to the family. 
1495 :O expectant mother, hold the hand of support. Strengthen the womb to sustain the foetus and, O observer of the disci piine of motherhood, hold the baby till it is mature for natural birth. 
1496 :A diti, the inviolable woman, who loves to have the baby, has accepted the helping hand of the husband and has observed her conjugal discipline. So may Tvashta, divine architect of life, bind the husband too in conjugal discipline so that the couple may have noble progeny. 
1497 :The bridegroom that was to come is come, and has now here arrived. In observance of law and custom, I acknowledge and welcome him in truth. And I thank and adore Indra, lord omnipotent, destroyer of darkness and evil, giver of settlement in peace and prosperity, divine harbinger of the fruits of a hundred noble acts of By the path the A shvin stars conduct the dawn, daughter of the sun, for the day, the parents bring up the daughter to marriageable maturity. May the bridegroom take the bride and conduct her to her new bright home. So has Bhaga, lord of conjugal good fortune said to me, so has the lord directed me. 
1498 :Great and golden beautiful is your law and dispensation of matrimony, Indra, lord of might and glory, which brings showers of peace and plenty of wealth, honour and excellence. Under that law and discipline, O lord of love, kindness and grace, bless me with the wife I love and cherish. 
1499 :Apachit is interpreted as Gandamala in Ayurveda: it is pustules or scrofulous inflammation of the glands in the neck area. 
1500 :Get off Apachits like an eagle bird from the habitat. Let the sun be the medicament, or let the moon light root you out. 
1501 :One is spotted, another is white, another is black, two are red. I have diagnosed and determined all the types for sure. Be out without damaging the patient's health. 
1502 :Ramayani, apachit with its roots in the blood vessels, will go without leaving a trace of recurrence. The boil will go. The sore will go, disappear. 
1503 :Take your share of the medicinal dose and go from the root. Take your share at the root from what I offer in the holy fire and go. 
1504 :(The remedy suggested, apart from the medicines, issun light, moon light and fumes and aroma of the herbal offerings into the fire.) O cruel Adversity, Nir-rti, into your fiery mouth I offer the sacrifice of my endeavour and comfort for for the freedom of these unfortunates who are bound down to slavery into your snares. Although these unfortunates believe that adversity is their destiny by birth, please know full well that I know full well that you are Nir-rti, adversity, slavery and the call of death because of sheer want of will, intelligence and action, you are not the destiny. 
1505 :offer of will, intelligence and action, that's your rightful share among us in life, and go, release these and those ensnared who suffer from the sin of belief and inaction. This is the voice of truth in thought, will and action. 
1506 :O Nir-rti, neither wholly cruel nor revengeful for sure, pray break the iron chains of bondage off from us. Yama, lord of karmic justice, ordains you unto me again and again. Homageto thelord of justice over birth and death with oblations of fresh and free karma in this life. 
1507 :O law of karmic destiny, you bind man in iron chains to the post of sufferance here in life where he pines in pain and fear of death a thousand ways. O Spirit of action in divine freedom, abiding with Yama and parental sages of past and present, pray raise this humanity to the heights of highest freedom and eternal joy. 
1508 :This Varuna tree of divine efficacious qualities wards off and cures yakshma, the consumptive disease, which affects the body system of this patient. Learned physicians use this and cure the disease. 
1509 :By word of Indra, M itra and Varuna, powers of vital energy, love and justice, and by the prescriptive advice of all divine and expert physicians, we cure and ward off your yakshma, consumptive and cancerous disease. 
1510 :Just as the dark cloud holds up these waters flowing round in all directions, so I stop and cure your yakshma by Vaishvanara fire, i.e., heat, fumigative and aromatic treatment by yajna with the fire-sticks of Supreme Brahma is the sole generous lord of the sun, the one lord of heaven, sole lord of the earth, sole lord of all things of the world of existence. O man, you too be the generous one most excellent over all people dedicated to the One Supreme. 
1511 :The ocean rules over all the floods, Agni rules over the whole earth, the moon is the most glorious of the nakshatras. O man, you too be the generous one most excellent over all people dedicated to One Suprenme. 
1512 :You are the refulgent ruler of life energies, you are on top of the entire humanity, you are half way up to share the nature of divinities. O ruler, you be the mighty generous one most excellent master over all dedicated to One Supreme. 
1513 :O Ruler, I conduct you to the seat of governance in the council. Take it at the centre of the Rashtra, be firm, never vascillate. Let all people love and honour you. Letnotthe Rashtra fall foul of you nor you swerve from the Rashtra and its honour. 
1514 :Stay here strong and firm, unmoved, unshakable like a mountain. O Ruler, rule at the centre constant as the Pole Star and hold the nation together in top condition. 
1515 :O Ruler, Indra, lord of might, has entrusted this commonwealth to you. H old and rule it to maintain it strong and unshaken with constant sacred oblations of action and self-sacrifice. To such a firm and steady ruler, let Soma, lord of inspiring creation, and this B rahmanaspati, sagely scholar of divine knowledge and wisdom, speak of Raja Dharma and socio-economic and political policy of a noble social order. 
1516 :The heaven is firm and constant, the earth is firm and constant, the dynamic universe is stable and constant, these mountains are firm and stable. The ruler of the people too is firm and constant. 
1517 :May thecosmic rulerVaruna, lord of justiceand discrimination between truth and untruth, help you maintain the social order in a steady state. May self- refulgent Brhaspati, lord of universal knowledge and boundless space bless you with steadiness. May Indra, lord omnipotent, and Agni, leading light of life, keep you firm and steady, and bless you to maintain the Rashtra firmly in a stable and inviolable state. 
1518 :Steady, firm and unshaken, O Ruler, crush the enemies, put down those vile persons who strike an attitude of enmity. May the people of all quarters of the earth and space in unison and equality of mind together and the council be strong and help you to stay firmly dedicated to the steadiness and stability of the order. 
1519 :O Rudra, spirit of health and love of life, with this top energy and excitement given by the generous and exuberant soma, and by the vigour and enthusiasm created thereby, we kindle and brighten up your spirit in the heart for the love of lustrous living. 
1520 :for the creation of love for life and living. This mantra, therefore, may be interpreted as the key to stir up the heart from a state of depression, and soma may be interpreted either as the soma herb and its juice or as the rejuvenating peace arising from meditation. Swami Dayanand interprets Rudra as 'that which saves from illness', which can be the physician, a herb, pranic energy raised, or the ultimate saviour God.) We excite the passion in your heart, we excite your mind. Let your mind follow me as the smoke follows the wind. (This is the call of life to love for living.) May M itra and Varuna, prana and apana energies, love of living and judgement of understanding, may divine Sarasvati, the breeze of Mother Omniscience, the centre of the earth even unto the ends of it, excite me and join me with you and you with me, O spirit of life and love ! The arrow which Rudra, lord of justice, punishment and remorse, has shot into your heart and all other body parts, we now extract from you out of the heart and the entire body. 
1521 :H undreds are the blood vessels spread out over all your body parts. We take out the poisons from all those blood vessels. 
1522 :Homage to you Rudra, lord both of punishment and peace. H omage to you and your shooting. H omage to the arrow on the bow and on the flight. H omage to thearrow onthetarget. (This is the respectful diagnosis, to be followed by the extraction and the comfort of relief.) Note: Normally this is the interpretation of this sukta: extraction of the arrow shot by an enemy. However, it may be interpreted in this way: this is an antidote to sukta 89. Sukta 89 suggests the love of life and living as a remedy for depression. If depression is cured by the love of life, the love might grow to lust and infatuation. The arrow can smite the heart, spreading out over the blood and every cell. Then we need the balance between depression and infatuation, the conjugal love of the householder and the lady of the house, and that love with judgement is the Vedic ideal. The cure of depression is excitement, the cure of excitement to the degree of infatuation is judgement. Excitement and peace should go together in the state of balance. The deity for both is Rudra, spirit of peace and punishment both. 
1523 :The sages have developed and matured this barley plant of life by sixfold practice of eightfold yoga. By that very curative practice and treatment, I reduce and drain out the afflictions of your body, mind and soul. 
1524 :(This mantra, in fact this sukta, is interpreted as the hymn of water cure. But this mantra also suggests, that it deals with cure of the self by karma, because 'apah' means not only waters but also karma. And the words 'ashtayoga' and 'shadyoga' suggest that the mantra deals with 'ashtanga' yoga and six karmas of every human being as in Patanjali's Yoga Sutras and M anusmrti, 1, 88-90. Reference may also be made to eight-sixes of Shvetashvatara Upanishad 1, 4.) The wind, vayu, moves downward, solar heat and Iight radiates downward to earth, the inviolable cow is milked downward. So may your ailment be drained out downward. 
1525 :Waters, karmas, are curative, waters, karmas, are curative of diseases, waters, karmas, are curative of all health problems. May waters, karmas, cure your problems too. 
1526 :The subject matter of this sukta is Vajin, any conceivable embodiment of energy in any conceivable context from the Lord Omnipotent and energy itself to the smallest possible dynamic particle, a swift, spirited, impetuous, heroic, warlike, potent and procreative victorious power, person, institution or thing of the world of nature and humanity: for example, Indra, the Omnipotent, ruler, leader, warrior, scholar, producer, fire, wind, sun, the social order, Sarasvati, Vak the Word, chhanda or poet and poetry, the arrow, the horse, the eagle, energy itself. 
1527 :Swift as the wind, as energy itself, be O Vajin on course, go by the speed of mind all over the world of omnipotent Lord Indra's creation. Let all Maruts, most vibrant powers of the world, knowing and being with the world of life, be and perform with you. MayTvashta, lord creator of world forms, vest the impulse and velocity of light and mind in your movement. 
1528 :O A rvan, O man, O vibrant spirit of the human nation, the power and energy which is concentrated in your heart, vested in the eagle and in the wind, and that which vibrates elsewhere too is ultimately hidden in mystery. By that very spiritand power, O mighty Vajin, win the battle of life. You were born to win in the struggle of existence for evolution and cross the limitations. 
1529 :O Vajin, mighty ruler and victorious leader, may your power and person leading the body politic of the nation bring for us and for your self-fulfilment beauty of life, peace and excellence and, may the lord self- refulgent above, without reservation or deviation, create for the great sustaining social order wealth, power and grandeur brilliant as the light in heaven. 
1530 :Yama, cosmic controller and law giver, Death, the destroyer of sinners, the giver of pain, the giver of nourishment, the violent force, the archer, the giver of shelter and settlement, noble people of brilliance and generosity, ail those arising and marching with armies, may all these spare and protect our brave. 
1531 :With honest mind and offers of oblations of all my might and ghrta, I do homageto the unfailing archer, the protective arrow, lord ruler of the universe and the giver of peace, and to all those who are worthy of homage and pray that they may ward off all our negativities of sin and evil. 
1532 :O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, M aruts, vibrant powers of winds that abide with the world of existence, Agni, light and fire and peace, and Varuna, sun of purest light and inspiration, protect us from sin and evil and death. And may we ever enjoy the gifts of the good will of the winds and the clouds of rain. 
1533 :We bring your minds together, we bring your vows and values, your thoughts and resolutions together. Those of you that stand apart in ideals and resolutions, all those of you we bring to agreement and unite you together. 
1534 :I accept your united minds with my whole heart and will. With your united minds, come and join my mind and will at the centre. I join your thoughts and feelings together into my central laws and discipline. Come, join me and follow me on the path I follow. 
1535 :joined together as warp and woof, divine Sarasvati is joined, so are I ndra and Agni, power and enlightenment, joined. O mother Sarasvati, enlighten us that we may realise this absolute unity. 
1536 :H igh up in thethird region from here, in heaven, there is the Ashvattha tree, seat of divinities. Thereon shines the light of immortality, and therefrom the light, the divines obtained the Kushtha herb. 
1537 :There i n heaven the gol den boat of gol den tackle floats in the light divine. There by the golden boat the divines obtained the kushtha herb, the very flower of immortality. 
1538 :are the essence of mountain snows. You are the essence and life of all objects of nature. Pray cure this patient of leprosy and make him hale and hearty. 
1539 :A11 the herbs of many forms and profuse growth and hundreds of medicinal efficacies, receiving their power and splendour from the moon, developed and reinforced by sagely scholars of the God-given gift of herbal medicine may, we pray, save us and cure us of all diseases, evil and sin. 
1540 :May they save us from the hurt and affliction caused by censure and imprecation, from ailments caused by water, from the snares of Varuna, natural justice, from the fear of untimely death and from offence and violence against natural force. (This mantra is more a prayer for immunity and observanceof disciplinethan for cure of the consequences of a breach of the discipline, or, let us say, it is for prevention and cure W hatever faults of omission or commission we do by eye or mind, whatever with tongue and speech, whether awake or asleep, of all those may soma, the herb, and Soma, lord of peace, cleanse us and save us from them. 
1541 :Yajna is victor over the negativities of life; Agni, light, fire, leader, is victor; Soma, moon, soma, peace, isvictor; Indra, omnipotence, isvictor. Let us offer this havi of our total activity of life into the yajnic fire of life in such a way that we may be victors over negativities, hate, jealousy and enmity in all our battles of life. 
1542 :O M itra and Varuna, prana and apana energies, sun and oceans, day and night, friends and powers of love and judgement, wise and all intelligent, let this social order of exuberant humanity rise and overflow with the honey sweets of peace and prosperity. Ward off adversity, cast away down and out. Banish sin, evil and crime out of our life and society. 
1543 :O friends and comrades of the human nation, rejoice and rise and, with love, loyalty and judgement, cooperate with this Indra, mighty world leader, winner and promoter of human habitations, lands, cows and culture, strong of thunder arms, victor of battles and destroyer of adversity and adversaries by the light and force of his lustre and splendour. 
1544 :It is Indra, the brave, omnipotent, that wins, never defeated, and makes us win, ever without defeat. And he shines on top, sole ruler over leaders, admirable, adorable, worthy of worship, love and reverence and total submission and surrender. O lord omnipotent, be with us, here itself, never for away. 
1545 :O Ruler of rulers, Indra, admirable, adorable, you are the glory of the people and scourge of the evil forces in society. You are the presiding power and protector over the people, and it is by your presence that the social order would be stable and long lasting beyond age and decay. 
1546 :O dispeller of darkness, destroyer of enemies and adversity, you are the ruler over the spaces wherever you move forwards. You are the ruler over the elevated phases of life wherever you move and rise. Indeed, as far as the streams of life flow, yours is the Territory, O victor and ruler. O lord most potent, generous and admirable, you are ever on the move and always on the right. 
1547 :Before the possibility of an onslaught of sin and distress, O lord omnipotent, Indra, I invoke you as the lord of boundless bliss and well being, blazing in glory, giver of enlightenment, commanding universal majesty, the sole manifestation of incomparable divinity. (And I am then unassailable.) Now then, whenever and whatever weapon of violence is raised and cast upon us with the intent to destroy us, instantly we take on the cover all round of Indra's arms of defence. 
1548 :We wear all round and wield Indra's arms of defence and self-protection, which arms of the universal protector, we pray, may defend us socially and spiritually. O Savita, self-refulgent life of life, O Soma, spirit of peace and joy, and Rajan, all compassing Ruler, let us be happily secure at heart for the sake of total well being. (Total faith in Divinity, self-confident spirit with love of peace and exuberant enthusiasm for living, and a refulgent ruling order, these are pillars of security and well being.) Brilliancies of nature and the clouds gave, the sun gave, the heavenly regions gave, the earth gave, and three Sarasvatis, that is, I la, Sarasvati, Bharati, i.e., the mystical, universal and local herbs and talents, of equal quality, have contributed and given the antidote to poison. 
1549 :O men of knowledge and wisdom, whatever waters in the desert lands the clouds are able to give you, by that very water given by the clouds, pray, prepare the antidote for poison, and with that water, given by the grace of God, render that poison ineffective. 
1550 :O herbal antidote of poison, you are the product of natural energies and gift of vibrant scholars. You are the sister, equal, of the brilliancies of nature in efficacy. O gift of the sun and earth, render the poison ineffective. 
1551 :O man, be strong and virile, breathe deep, grow, and let your body and limbs grow strong too. And as you and your body limbs grow, so let your sphere of activity too expand so that you master and win whatever By the strength and vitality by which we energise the feeble, by which we excite the depressed, O B rahmanaspati, lord of universal energy, pray energise and extend the life and influence of this man like a bow at the optimum stretch. 
1552 :I raise your spirits and extend your dominion like the string on the bow. Rise and advance in life without hesitation like a tiger upon the deer. Be active without relent, always. 
1553 :O Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn, inspirers of new life, just as the dawn comes and joins the day, so may, O life and love, your spirit arise and join me and O man, I draw your mind unto me like the Ashvins conducting the dawn and light of the sun. Let your mind join unto me and the spirit divine in me like a blade of grass torn off by wind and clinging to the earth. 
1554 :By both hands, with both passion and judgement, I hold on to the love and spirit of the omnipresent lord of glory, faster than energy itself, creator of this beautiful world, giver of joy, all watching lord of judgement and dispensation, and the ultimate saviour, redeemer and destroyer of suffering. 
1555 :O enemies of life, spirit and the nation, may Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, the sagely scholar of the Vedas and the commander of total forces of the nation control, bind and eliminate you all. Let Savita, lord of lifeand life energy, bind and depleteyou of your power. Let M itra, spirit of love, and Aryama, lord of judgement, bind you in fetters and deal with you. Let the Ashvins, the people, and Bhaga, lord all potent of prosperity and nation's power, bind, control and eliminate you. 
1556 :I bind and control enemies that are far off, close by and in between atthemiddledistance. Letlndra ward off all of them, and O Agni, you too bind them all in fetters. 
1557 :Those that come to battle in hoards with flags flying, let Indra keep them off, and O Agni, you too bind them all with fetters. 
1558 :(This sukta speaks of enemies both outside and i nside i n the personal ity. F or the enemies outside,' I ndra' would mean the Ruler with all his allied forces around and the Lord Divine above. For the enemies inside the personality, 'Indra' would mean the soul with all its allied powers in the personality.) By taking over and with control we hold up the enemies. Their prana and apana energies, we dissever, and we devital i se their I ife energy w ith I if e energy itself. (We pay the enemies in their own coin by depleting their energies, powers and forces.) I have created and invented the arms and strategy of taking over, which has been further refined and sophisticated by the relentless work of I ndra, the designer strategist. O Agni, commander of the forces, all those enemies of ours that are here around, round up and bind them all. 
1559 :Let Indra and Agni, the powerful ruler and blazing commander, and let the ruler and Soma, peaceable keeper, both accordant in law and cooperation, bind them. And let Indra, commander of stormy forces, prepare for us the method and strategy of taking over and binding our enemies. 
1560 :Just as the mi nd fI i es w i th the obj ects of its Iove at its highest speed, so do you, O man, fly forth at the speed of mind to the reachable goal in search of knowledge. 
1561 :Just as the arrow flies forth at its sharpest and at the fastest, so do you, O man, fly forth at the speed of mind to the ends of the earth. 
1562 :Just as sun-rays radiate round at the speed of their own velocity, so do you, O man, fly forth at the speed of mind to the ends of the ocean's roll and bounds of skies. 
1563 :At the entrance and at the rear, let holy grasses grow and flowers bloom, and let there be a spring or fountain playing to form a little pool, or let there be a pleasure pool with blooming lotus flowers. 
1564 :Let there be a confluence of waters and let it be a centre of human activity. Let it be close to the beach, the atmosphere as deep as the depth of spatial oceans. Let our homes be in the midst of a lake, and make the O house of the nation, we surround you with the cover of the shade of cool. And when there is the cool of water reservoirs, let fire be the antidote. 
1565 :O Lord of eternal glory over the entire world of existence, all victorious, all subduing, deliver me from my limitations and fears and entrust me to your divine power of universal protection. O divine power of cosmic protection, Trayamana, pray protect all our people, all our animals and all that is our wealth, power and excellence in the world. 
1566 :O Trayamana, divine power of cosmic protection and promotion, deliver me unto Vishvajit, divine spirit of courage and universal victory. O Vishvajit, divine spirit of courage and universal victory at heart, protect all our people, all our animals, and all that is our wealth, power and excellence in the world. 
1567 :O Vishvajit, spirit of divine courage and victory at heart, dedicate me to the divine spirit of good and universal service and welfare. O spiritof good, universal service and welfare, protect and promote all our people, all our animals, and all that is our wealth, power and excellence in the world. 
1568 :O Spiritof good, universal service and welfare, Kalyani, dedicate me to Sarvavit, the divine spirit of universality. O Sarvavit, spirit of universal love and service, protect and promote all our people, all our animals, and all that is our wealth and values, power and excellence in the world. 
1569 :O M edha, noble intelligence, you are the first and adorable faculty of ours for our good. Come to us with lands, cows, wisdom and culture. Cometo us with horses and achievements. Come to us with the rays of the sun. 
1570 :(Intelligence is the faculty that helps the spirit to knowledge, action, initiative and achievement. It is a source of inspiration, not a substitute for action.) For worship of the divinities and for protection and promotion of divine faculties and achievements, I invoke and inculcate Medha, noble intelligence, first and highest God-given human faculty, treasure trove of divine consciousness and knowledge, adored by Brahmanas, loved by Rshis, and served, valued and developed by Brahmacharis, disciplined young seekers of knowledge. 
1571 :That divine intelligence which the Rbhus, divine artists, knew and had, that which the Asuras, vibrant men of energy and knowledge, knew and had, that excellent and auspicious intelligence which the Rshis knew, valued and enjoyed, that same we all invoke, inculcate and receive into ourselves. 
1572 :With that noble intelligence which the wise sages of vision and creative-inventive mind knew, had and developed, O Agni, lord of light, bless me, and make me wise and creative with the vision divine. 
1573 :With words of vision and holiness of faith, and with radiations of the sun-rays, we adore and inculcate in ourselves divine intelligence day and night: intelligence every morning intelligence every evening, Pippali is the cure for distracted, disrupted and extremely afflicted states of body and mind of patients: this the brilliant scholars and specialists accept, and declare that it is efficacious for the life and health of patients of leprosy and urinary, stomach and glandular disorders. Such they have prepared it. 
1574 :As the pippali herbs grow, develop and are developed from their very beginning, the physicians say that the person who is given pippali from his earliest age never comes to suffer affliction of ill health of body and mind. 
1575 :have planted and dug you out, O Pippali, again and again, since you are the sure cure for patients of wind, distraction of mind and affliction of pain. 
1576 :Self-refulgent Agni, ancient and eternal, happily adorable in yajnic programmes of humanity, ever a beneficent giver, your presence pervades and always sits anew on the vedi. Be kind and gracious. Be kind and gracious to this person, this social order, a new manifestation of your own self, bless it with joy and fulfilment, and bring us all good fortune and prosperity. 
1577 :Born in fulfilment of desire and prayer for achieving the best and highest is this child, this social order. Pray protect it against basic violation of the laws of yama and of the motions of refulgent sun and moon, taking it safely through all evils of the world to live a full life of hundred years. 
1578 :This heroic brave is born at a timefitfor a lion, a noble hero bearing the marks of favourable stars. W hen it grows up, comes of age and rises, let it not violate its father and founder, nor its mother, she gave it birth. 
1579 :O Agni, release this person to freedom from bondage of body, mind and soul. He is bound, wholly possessed, and he mumbles and mutters deliriously. Pray do it for my sake, and when he is out of this delirium, he would render unto you whatever is due. 
1580 :O man, may Agni calm you down if your mind is disturbed. I, the physician, know and apply the healing Whether you are excited by reasons of the mind and senses to a state of infatuation or by conditions of nature, or possessed by violent desires, evil ambitions and frustration, I know and apply the healing balm so that you would be free from excitement and possession and regain your proper self. 
1581 :Again and again let the freshness of breezes, rippling of waters and flashes of lightning give this healing balm to you. Let Indra, lord omnipotent and nature's electric energy do its part for you. Let Bhaga, cosmic spirit of abundance, do its part for you. Let all divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity do their part for you so that you may never suffer delirium, dementia, schizophrenia or infatuation and self-delusion again. 
1582 :(Thissukta implies that life and nature was never intended to be negative and hostile to humans. All negativities of body, mind and spirit are creations of our own karmic performance over time, and all ailments are curable by the replenishment of our original and real nature through medication, meditation and divine grace. Only the right healer and the right balm is needed with persistent and faithful practice. Reference may be made to M aharshi Patanjali's Yoga-Sutras 4,1, specially, and to 1,12.) O Lord self-refulgent and omniscient, Agni, ruler and guide of humanity, let this man not hurt or kill the senior. Protect him from severing himself from the common root of these members of the human family. O Lord, you know them and their bonds.Break the chains that ensnare and alienate them, and let all the noble people too know your purpose and follow you in the service of human solidarity. 
1583 :O lord and guide of humanity, Agni, release the bonds of these people, all these three who are bound in three chains over body, mind and soul. You know all, pray loosen, and break the bonds, free them all, father, mother and child. 
1584 :Let the bonds by which the ailing person istied and twisted every limb, ensnared and overwhelmed, be I oosed and removed off you, O man, they are removabl e, the man must be freed. O Pushan, lord giver of life and nourishment, cleanse the evils and negativities that destroy the fetus in the womb. 
1585 :(This sukta enjoins freedom of the individual with reverenceto theseniorsand without getting oneself alienated from the common roots. Then it prescribes integrity of the family but without the snares of infatuation. The third verse says that man must be born full and to fullness and must be free because man is born free, inalienated and un-uprooted as a child of divinity and natural piety. Sin and ailenation is unnatural.) Divinities cleanse life from sin and evil throughout the three phases of time, past, present and future. The Lord of past, present and future, removes this sin and evil from among humans too. For this reason, O man, if ever sin and evil come and take you on, let the Devas, brilliant sages, wash that away and cleanse you with Vedic knowledge. 
1586 :O vile sin and evil, goto the rays of the sun and evaporate. Go after the smoke and be absorbed to naught. Go to the lofty clouds or to the mists and be lost, or float with foam of the seas, be dashed and disappear on the rocky shores. O lord of life and nourishment, Pusha, cleanse humanity of all sin and evils that destroy budding life in the womb. 
1587 :on humanity over five perceptive organs, five volitional organs, mind and intellect, and they are washed off by the lord of all time past, present and future. Then, O man, if sin and evil come and take you on, let brilliant sages cleanse you of that by divine knowledge. 
1588 :O noble sages and scholars of divinity, whatever offence we might have committed against the divinities of nature and humanity, even though we are ourselves dedicated and enlightened, may you, brilliant sages of top Aditya order, redeem us from that by our yajnic performance according to the laws of Dharma. 
1589 :O brilliant sages of top Aditya order, adorable friends of humanity, constant conductors of yajna in the service of life, nature and Divinity, whatever yajna we have not been able to perform even though we are enlightened and dedicated to yajna and Dharma, pray redeem us from that sin of deprivation here in this life. 
1590 :O Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and brilliant sages, free from selfish motives and desires, we yajamanas perform theyajna pouring ghrta and offering holy materials into the fire with ladles full. Still if we fail to perform the yajna as perfectly as we ought to, pray redeem us from that sin of deprivation by your vision and divine knowledge. 
1591 :O Vishvedevas, sages and learned people, whatever sin and evil we have committed whether consciously or unconsciously, pray release us from that sin and evil, united as you are with us in harmony. 
1592 :Whatever the sin or evil I have committed or I have wished to commit, whether when awake or asleep, then, the sinner as I am, may all people now present and all those people that will be present in future rescue and redeem me from that sin like one tied to the stake. 
1593 :L i ke one rel eased from the stake, I i ke one soi I ed with sweat now washed and cleansed of filth, like ghrta filtered and purified through the strainer, may all holy powers of nature and noble humanity cleanse and purify me from sin and evil. 
1594 :Whatever practice and course of action ancient farmers, tilling the land for the production of food with knowledge like knowledgeable people, established and left us I follow, and unto the brilliant sovereign render the ruler's part of the produce. May the food be honey sweet for us al I, for the ruler as wel I as for the producer. 
1595 :Let the brilliant sovereign fix the share of the state and of the producer. Honey sweet is the share of the sharer who further honey-sweetens it with the joy of satisfaction. But whatever, otherwise, comes from mother as a result of affection or ambition, or whatever father has appropriated from others, all that is sinful. 
1596 :If this sinful share comes to us from mother or from father or from brother, or from son, or even from our own mind's ingenuity, then as long as the parental seniors are with us, may their mind and passion be at peace by God's grace. 
1597 :debtor to Yama, lord of ultimate law. However, I walk with the mighty, and that mighty, O Agni, lord of light and leadership, you are. You know all the rules of freedom from the bonds. Enlighten me that I may be free from the bonds of the debt of obligation. 
1598 :Let us pay back the debt of obligation while we are here, living, let us offer this gift of creative action for the other living beings and be free from the debt. W hatever food and other things I have consumed, that is my debt of obligation to others, to the law, and to the law giver. And here is this, my contribution of creation and production, and thus, O lord of light and law, Agni, Let us be free from debt here in this world. Let us be free from debt in the other. And let us be free from debt in the third world. The paths of Divinities, the paths of ancestors and life givers, all these paths, let us tread in freedom without debt over all the worlds. 
1599 :W hatever the offences we have committed with hands in action, ambitious to over-reach the starry orbits of life, then may Apsaras, circuitous dynamics of life and law, relentlessly vigilant fiery conquerors, bail us out and put us back on the right course. 
1600 :O relentless watchful sustainers of the Rashtra, pray bail us out of our trespasses and put us back on course lest the agent of life and law inthisworld pursue us with the rope to exact the debt money rising in compound measure. 
1601 :O Apsaras, spirits of life and law, sustainers of all divinities of life, pray enlighten us to pay off our debts so that when I meet a creditor, or meet a woman, or approach somebody for a favour, then, O A psaras, O learned sages, no one dare speak words of pride and insolence to me. 
1602 :O light of life, Agni, if I borrow without any seri ous purpose or make a promise w ithout the i ntention to keep it, then may Vaishvanara, impeller of humanity, all promotive ruler, most radiant haven of life, raise us from such low level to high excellence and action. 
1603 :I confess to Vaishvanara, universal benefactor, what debts I owe, what promises I have to fulfil among the divinities. He knows how to snap these snares, so we must abide by that lord of determined certainty. 
1604 :May Vaishvanara, all impeller and sanctifier, purify me, so that whatever the hope I run after, whatever the promise I make, and whatever my prayer from the heart, though all without full understanding, I may remove whatever sinful there may be in that promise, hope and prayer. 
1605 :If we sin against the earth, sky, solar regions, our mother and father, and cause them hurt, violence and irreverence, then may this homely fire of yajna and hospitality redeem us from that sin to repair the damage and raise us to the higher level of noble action and spiritual excellence. 
1606 :Aditi, eternal nature, is our origin, earth our mother, heavenly light our father, sky our brother: may they save us from si n and i mprecati on, and give us peace and freedom of being. O man, born in such home and family, do not fall from this paradise of filial piety. 
1607 :W here people of holy heart and virtuous action live and rejoice, having left off the ailments of their own body, with limbs undamaged and whole, their minds unsullied by crookedness, in a land of joy, there let us live and see our parents and children together in a happy home. 
1608 :Lord most potent, Agni, breaker of the chains of slavery, relax and remove from us all the snares of bondage, lowest aswell ashighest, which are control led by Varuna, lord of cosmic justice. Removeevil thoughts and dreams and all dirt of malignity from us so that we may rise to the noble state of virtuous action. 
1609 :O man, if you are tied in chain to the stake on earth with your own words of promise in human affairs, then know, from all that bondage, this homely familial fire of yajna would raise you from this low status to the higher state of virtuous action. 
1610 :Let the two divine stars of know I edge and action like sun and moon, both for sure redeemers and givers of freedom, arise and give us the gift of immortality here on earth and, thus, let the release of bonded humanity go on forward. 
1611 :Set out on way to freedom, create a new world of freedom and joy, release the souls in chains from the binding fetters and, like a new born baby free from the womb, try aiI the paths of possibility in freedom of action and free choice. 
1612 :O Vishvakarma, lord creator, divine architect of the universe, you are the first manifest cause of cosmic life and law of evolution of the world of existence. Knowing this I dedicate this life's part of my performance of Dharma to you. Pray bless us that we may complete the journey of our life by the unbroken contintuity of our yajnic performance beyond old age to the full and maintain our link with Divinity and the Divine Law. 
1613 :Some people complete their life's journey by their Dharmic performance linked to Divinity, their performance consecrated to ancestors by obligation. Others, deprived of kith and kin, do their part of service as obligation to the deprived. For them too, giving for the sake of giving, life is heaven on earth itself. 
1614 :O wedded couples, start living right now for the service of Divinity. Loveand livetogether with Divinity. Thosewho loveand work with faith in lifeand Divinity really enjoy this world as heaven on earth. Whatever your service, work and achievement perfected in the fire discipline of yajna, live and work together for the protection, promotion and extension of that in divine service. 
1615 :O Lord of light and fire of life, Agni, living here on earth with thefervourand disciplineof divineservice with heart and soul, we rise in the scale of the universal, expansive and rising yajna of life's evolution. We pray that, thus called in on earth, we may live and enjoy life till full old age and after in the happy state of the third heaven of the spirit beyond the pleasures of body and mind. 
1616 :These pure and sanctified young maidens, holily lovable in the yajna of married life, I proffer unto the hands of educated and cultured celibates, singly, one for one, and settle in a happy home. Whatever the purpose and mission for which I join and consecrate you in marriage, may I ndra, Vishvakarma, who destroys evil and darkness, fulfill that for me. 
1617 :(Married couples should join with and carry forward the thread of life in divine service.) O friends and inmates of the hall of yajna, I give you this treasure trove of knowledge and divine joy whichj ataveda, lord omniscient, has revealed and given us. The yajamana will surely come to all good and total well being. Know That which abides in the highest heavens and shi nes i n the deepest core and hi ghest vi si on of the soul. 
1618 :O friends and inmates of the hall of yajna, know this that is in the highest heaven, and know that the worldtoo is here in. The yajamana will cometoall good and total well being. Do all acts of piety of choice as well as of obligation for it openly without fear or inhibition. 
1619 :The divines are parents, parents divine. I am that who I am, the child of Divinity. 
1620 :That same I am, I mature and perfect, the same I give, I join the divine, offer myself in yajna. I must never be severed or alienated from what I have given by yajna and self-sacrifice. 
1621 :O brilliant soul, abide in the heaven of joy. There may thisyajna of yours too abide. O Lord self-refulgent, pray accept and acknowledge our acts of Dharmic duty. Enlighten us and be kind and gracious to us. 
1622 :From the heaven of light and boundless skies, an oceanic drop of rain has fallen, over flowing with divine ecstasy. O Agni, lord of light, with my honour and excellence, nectar sweet of taste and prosperity, with songs of joy, yajna and best of holy actions I celebrate the shower on me. 
1623 :If it falls from the tree, it isthe fruit, if from the sky it is a drop, either way it is, a refreshing breeze which, wherever ittouches, body or garment, let it, with It is the soothing balm, joyous fragrance, prosperity, gold, lustrous splendour, purifying sanctity. Overtheworld, all purifiers are extensively spread over us. Let no want, no adversity, no calamity ever befall us. 
1624 :Hero and protector of the land and forests, brilliant as the sun, friend and heroic leader crossing over crises and chalIenges, be strong of body and power. Committed you are to the land and traditions of humanity. Grow stronger, expand in power and strengthen us too. And may your commander win all the battles. 
1625 :M an of knowledge and power, receive, cultivate and socially promote the light and energy emanating from the sun and earth. Receive, cultivate and promote the strength, courage and endurance emanated from the trees and forests. Cultivate and promote the energy of the waters. Refine and strengthen the chariot invincible as thunder and blazing with rays of the sun, and develop it further by self-sacrifice, research and investment. 
1626 :Brilliant leader and warrior, dedicated to the thunderbolt of Indra, army of the winds, light of the sun and the depth of space and the ocean as ideals, in love with the power of lightning, inner thoughts of friends and conscience of the best man, and enjoying our love and trust, you may now receive our gifts of homage for further growth and development of the nation of humanity. 
1627 :(These mantras occur in Rgveda 6, 47, 26-28 and yajurveda 29, 52-54. According to Swami Dayanand, on the authority of Grammar, Nirukta and theBrahmanas, 'Ratha' issomethingorsomeonewhich is a cause or source basis or provider of pleasure, peace, safety and security: It can be a chariot, a heroic person like leader or ruler, the human body, knowledge, the sun and the world itself, even the Divine Spirit.) H eroic leader, loud and bold, let the war drum of action, your clarion call to the nation, resound over earth and sky and inspire the nation with the breath of life and passion. Let the wide world, moving and nonmoving, know you with love and honour and hear the call. And, in unison with the power and grandeur of the nation and the best of brilliant nobility, let the call drive off the enemies farther than the farthest. 
1628 :Brave hero, roar like winds and clouds, make the enemy cry in fear. Inspire us with spirit and lustre. K eep off the evils and calamities. Thunder as lightning, hold off the enemies at bay. O hero, overwhelm the demonic enemies with your battle cry and throw them out. You are the iron fist of Indra, be bold and make every one strong and firm. 
1629 :Indra, mighty hero, rout and conquer those enemy forces. Let our forces win with flying colours. Let the drum resound, with the flag flying. United, our men on the wings of horse fall upon the enemy forces. Let our heroes of the chariot be ever victorious. 
1630 :O Vanaspati, herbaceous plants and trees, O Oshadhi, sanative herb, leave not the least trace of the heart sore, dementia, blood problem or any disease spreading all over the body system. 
1631 :of the two eruptions or nodules which form in the armpits or in the groin. The cure tried for sure is chipudru. 
1632 :Whatever infection or weakness of the limbs, ears, eyes, spreading around upto the infection and weakness of the heart, we cure upto the root. And whatever consumptive disease there be, unknown, we diagnose and root out downward through diet and expurgation. 
1633 :The day when the planets accepted the star as the ruler and made him the wielder of power so that the system could be a Rashtra, a self-controlled self- governing social order, that was the auspicious day for them, created for them and given unto themselves and to the ruling star. (This same is the way the ruler of the Rashtra is elected and appointed, the way the constitution is made and adopted.) Let the day be auspicious for us at mid-day, let the day be auspicious in the evening, let the day be auspicious for us in the morning, and let the night too of every day be auspicious for us. 
1634 :O Ruler, mighty star among planets, make the day auspicious for us by day and night, by the planets and by the sun and moon. 
1635 :O Ruler of the planets, refulgent among people, mover and shaker of things around, who provide for a happy day for us, a happy evening, auspicious days and By the grace of I ndra, lord of glory, beatific and blissful, I work and raise myself to prosperity, power and good fortune with excellence, and then, I pray, let all want, adversity, meanness and miserliness flee away from me. 
1636 :O Lord, by the power, prosperity and excellence of light and lustre with which you exceed and transcend all things of beauty and grandeur cherished by all, pray bless me and make me excel I ent, and then, I pray, I et al I want, misery, meanness and miserliness flee away from me. 
1637 :that excellence and grandeur which is enshrined in all things loved and cherished and which grows higher and higher constantly, pray raise me to excellence and prosperity, and then let all want, misery, meanness and miserliness flee away from me. 
1638 :To appreciate and understand this sukta and the following upto 132, we should refer to Yajurveda 34, 5 which describes the cosmic mind as the treasure-hold of divine knowledge and universal memory. 
1639 :Of the cosmic forces which comprehend all the true, good and beautiful things and values of life, and of the cosmic waves of the universal mind which lead to comprehension of all that is true, good and beautiful, this Vedic knowledge is the memory content. O divinities of nature and brilliant scholars of humanity, pray invoke and promote this divine knowledge, and may that divine mind enlighten and sanctify me. 
1640 :May that cosmic omniscience remember mefor my sake: this is all. Let the darling Divine remember me for my sake: this is all. O divinities of nature and brilliant sages, pray invoke and promote this divine knowledge, and may that divine mind enlighten and sanctify me. 
1641 :A s that cosmic i ntel Iigence would remember me, so would I never fall off from Divinity. O divinities of nature and sagely scholars of humanity, pray invoke and promote this divine knowledge, and may that divine mind enlighten and sanctify me. (Refer also toYajurveda 40,15, and Ishopanishad, 17). 
1642 :O M aruts, cosmic winds and vibrant sages, arouse the divine memory in me. O skies, arouse the divine ecstasies in me. O Agni, leading light of Divinity, enlightened teacher ofVedic knowledge, awake the love and joy of learning in me and arouse the cosmic frequency in my mind. And may thatdivinemind, thus, enlighten and sanctify me. (Refer also toYajurveda 34, 1 - 6 ) O Smara, divine love and cosmic memory, with the very basis of my foundations upto the highest intelligence, I explore and float over thoughts and reflections of divine love and memory. O divinities of nature and sages of humanity, pray invoke and arouse this knowledge and love and may that divine mind enlighten and sanctify me. 
1643 :O cooperative and definitive faculty of the mind, explore, infer and crystallise the nature and context of this love and divine knowledge, use all your potential to think with total submission and surrender. O divinities of nature and humanity, pray invoke and arouse this knowledge and love and may the divine mind enlighten and sanctify me. 
1644 :O divine love and cosmic memory, though you may elude me by threeyojanas, i.e., be beyond the earth, the sky and the solar regions, beyond five yojanas, i.e., beyond the five senses and five pranas, or even beyond the possibility of attainment by mind, intelligence, memory and the imagination, still you would comeback and bless because you are our ultimate sustainer, your children on earth. 
1645 :That smara, divine love and intimations of cosmic memory, which the divinities poured into the human mind and faculties of perception and volition, enlightening and sanctifying it with thought, reflection and intuition, that same love and memory I develop, mature and perfect with the knowledge and discipline of Varuna, lord of light and judgement, O lord of love, in your service. 
1646 :cosmic memory, so enlightening and sanctifying, which all saints and sages, scholars, poets and teachers of the world, parents, literature and traditions poured into the human mind and faculties of perception and action with thought, reflection and intuition, that same love and memory I develop, mature and season to perfection with the discipline and Dharma of Varuna, lord of light and judgement, O lord of love in your service. 
1647 :That smara, divine love and intimations of cosmic memory, so enlightening, purifying and sanctifying, which Indrani, power, prosperity and excellence of the life of human nation, poured into the national mind and faculties of the corporate personality, with thought, reflection and social genius, that same love and memory I develop, mature and season to perfection with the discipline and Dharma of Varuna, social sense of generosity and justice of the nation's honour. 
1648 :universal knowledge and wisdom, enlightening, purifying and elevating, which Indragni, powers of law, governance and national defence, and the leading lights of knowledge, education and culture, poured into the mind and faculties of the nation's perception, thought and action with reflection, analysis and judgement of situations, that same love and universal wisdom I develop and refine with the discipline and Dharma of Varuna, lord of universal watch, judgement and dispensation. 
1649 :Thatsmara, universal love and cosmic memory of life's nature and potential, enlightening, purifying and elevating, which M itra and Varuna, divine love and judgement, sun and moon, air and ocean, and the nation's sense of love and pride, on the one hand, and the sense of judgement and reality, on the other, poured into the mind and action of the people with self- confidence and objectivity, that same love and judgement, and confidence and caution. I develop and refine with the discipline and Dharma of Varuna, the nation's law and constitution without forsaking the vision and faith in Divinity. 
1650 :The divine, brilliant and generous teacher who tied the girdle, firmed it and assigned us the task in studies and later in life, by whose word, order and discipline we learn, act and live in life, may he wish us all success and lead usto fulfil our duties and obligations to freedom. 
1651 :O Girdle of the celibate seeker of knowledge, you are freely elected for and taken on, you are the yajnic oblation of self-sacrifice, you aretheinviolableweapon of the sages, you are the fore-mark of the discipline of dedication, the very food and sustenance of life and action, and you are the destroyer of formidable negativities and saviour from sins of omission and commission. 
1652 :Brahmachari as I am, a dedicated celibate student of life and death, I ask of ever existent Death for one person, one soul, away for Yama, a life of disciplineand education, and that one person I bind with Brahma, divine knowledge, hard discipline, hard labour and this girdle, the mark of discipline and dedication to life against the onslaught of death. 
1653 :O Girdle, you are the daughter of Shraddha, inviolable faith in truth, born of Tapas, hard, relentless disciplineof body, mind and soul, and sister of the Rshis, sages of noble actions among humanity. O Girdle, bring us understanding and intellect, genius and discrimination, tapas, inviolable dedication and moral and spiritual honour and excellence. 
1654 :creative Rshis, makers of men of noble action, tied round themselves, bind me too with love and faith to live a long life of health, honour and enlightenment. 
1655 :May this Vajra, thunderbolt of law, justice and dispensation within, and the defence forces against enemiesfrom outsidefulfil the needs of the rule of law, truth and justice. May it eliminate the strongholds of enemies and the very life and existence of negative and destructive forces. Let it snap their activities and block the life flow of their system just like I ndra, thunder and lightning breaking the dark clouds. 
1656 :Let the enemy lie down and low below the higher ones in the depth of earth. Let him never rise up, let him lie flat, smitten by the thunderbolt. 
1657 :O thunderbolt of law and punishment, seek out whoever oppresses, catch hold of whoever oppresses and tyrannizes and throw him off. O wielder of power and force of thunderous law, push down the head of the violent, oppressor and the terrorist. Let him never raise his head. 
1658 :Whatever I eat, I turn into strength, and thus I wield the Vajra, lustrous weapon of inviolable diamond quality breaking the shoulders of the enemy just like the sun breaking the dark clouds. 
1659 :Whatever I drink I drink well and wholly like the sea which drinks up and consumes all the streams, and thus having consumed the strength of the enemy, we exhaust him of all his vitality. 
1660 :Whatever I swallow I swallow completely just like the sea which swallows and assimilates all the streams, and having consumed the vitality of the enemy, we exhaust him of his strength. 
1661 :O divine Oshadhi, Nitatni, born and growing on the divine earth, we dig you up for strong and luxurious hair. 
1662 :Strengthen the old wearing out hair, grow where hair has not grown, and where hair is grown, make it long and luxurious. 
1663 :O man, if your hair falls off, or if it falls off from the root, all this I revitalise and strengthen with this herbal tonic for all hair problems. 
1664 :The herb N itatni which the brilliant scholar of medicinal yajna discovered and dug out for the growth of girls' hair for long and luxurious beauty, the seeker of efficacious remedy brings up to the homes of unruly haired. 
1665 :The length and quality of hair is to be measured first by brightness of sun-rays and then by the length of both arms. Let the hair of head grow like reeds of a lake and be jet black par excellence for you. 
1666 :O Nitatni, herbal hair care Oshadhi, strengthen the root of the hair, let it grow, lengthen the middle, and upto the end. Let the hair of the head grow long and thick like reeds of a lake and let it be jet black par excellence for you, for men and women both. 
1667 :O Oshadhi, you are the best of herbs, most highly praised and renowned. Please cure this impotent man, this effeminate man, my patient, today, and make him full man. 
1668 :M ake the impotent man actively potent. M ake the effeminate man actively virile. O physician, Indra, with the sanative, ground and energised, cure both his seminal glands, removing the obstruction. 
1669 :O impotent man, I have cured the impotence. O debilitated, I have cured the debility. O cold and frigid, I have cured thefrigidity. We restore activity, excitation and desire into the brain centres of this patient. 
1670 :Inthetwo natural seminal ducts in which resides sexual fluidity, there on the seminal glands I open the flow with the surgical pin. 
1671 :Just as women beat the'nada' grass with stone for cover, so do I open the semi nal passage of your organ above the seminal glands beside the sexual nerve. 
1672 :Here you arise and emerge, conjugal spirit of love, bright harbinger of good fortune for me. Hundred are your expansive versatilities of life. Thirty-three are your defined interests in respect of divinities of nature and humanity. 
1673 :O maiden of my love, with that same art and versatiIity of hundredfold possi bi Iities of conjugal bliss, Let your heart be afflicted with love for me. Let your mouth be parched with love. Afflict me too with love, excite me with care, and live you too and roam around with mouth parched for love. 
1674 :O spiritof conjugality full of loveand mutuality, excitingly inspiring and keen for familial settlement, generous harbinger of good fortune, inspire and move both her and me, arise and let our hearts be equally j ust as the mouth of a thirsty man deprived of water dries up, unslaked, thus, O conjugal love, dry up my mouth with love and desire for the maiden. And thus too, O lady of love at heart, roam around, your mouth afflicted, unslaked, thirsting for love. 
1675 :just as 'Nakula', non-compromiser with evil, having broken through 'Ahi', dark cloud of passion, settles back to peace and inner joy, so, O Viryavati, spirit of life's love and vigour, come and let us settle, both in love and peace as one whole in spirit, though otherwise split individualities for want of love, in search of love and fulfilment. 
1676 :O Brahmanaspati, lord giver of food, J ataveda, all knowing lord of the world in existence, let those two tiger teeth (usually known as canines) just grown, with which the baby loves to bite the father and mother, be good and comfortable. 
1677 :Eat rice, eat barley, and eat sesame and lentils, this is your treasure-share ordained by nature, O teeth, do not hurt father and mother. 
1678 :Both grown by the process of nature, together, beautiful and auspicious, let that which is deformed be off from here, elsewhere. O teeth, do not hurt father and mother. Let the growth be comfortable and well- formed. 
1679 :The subject of this sukta is growth and development on a collective basis. But development of what? This question is left open. The sukta says: Enah, 'these'. 'These' has been interpreted as cows, the people as a body, the students as a community. The intention seems to be that life at any living level is a collectivity, has to grow and has to be developed as an organismic organisation. Even the whole universe is an organism, Purusha, a living, breathing, intelligent, self-organising, sovereign system. The sukta does mention functionaries who organise the growth and development of the collective body: Vayu, Tvashta, Indra, Rudra, Ashvins, and it also mentions organisations at different characteristic levels: Devas, humans and demons. We take up the growth and development of the human community through education, culture and enlightenment. 
1680 :Let Vayu, the man of vibrancy, enthusiasm and enlightenment bring these, young generation, together, that is, in educational institutions together, meant for boys and for girls separately. Let Tvashta, man of fine imagination specialised in specific characteristic and social forms, hold and manage them for growth in their characteristic social lines and professions. Let Indra, supreme commander of the institution, speak to them as one community, and let Rudra enlighten them for growth, each in his or her own line of interest. 
1681 :LetRudra, by natural predilection and individual interest and potential, join them into married couples in practical complementary fields of life. Let the Ashvins, husband wife, then, make a mark in life, and let the couple, thus, grow and profusely prosper with progeny. 
1682 :As lived and acted the Devas, men of divine nature, as lived and acted the A suras, men of pure natural character, and as lived and acted men of intelligent human nature, so do you, O Ashvins, all men and women, mark and act for yourselves for growth a thousand ways. 
1683 :O barely crop, rise and grow abundant by your own natural fercundity. Fill up all the food stores of the world. Let no hail or thunder from the sky strike you. 
1684 :O yava, O food, where we praise and exalt you as divine, there listening and sustaining us, grow and rise like the light of heaven, expand and roll like the ocean, unbounded, unviolated. 
1685 :Let the producers be i nexhausti ble, Iet the stores be inexhaustible, let the food givers be inexhaustible, O yava, and let the beneficiaries be inexhaustible. 
1686 :Those who reach to the origin and the original of the Word or highest language through meditation, and who speak but only and exclusively of the law and spirit of Reality, grow on from the objective and the psychic phases of reality and consciousness to the third phase of consciousness and reality, and by the grace of the third phase, the Spirit Divine and the Vedic vision, reach to the fourth, absolute state of Turiya, and through the Turiya attain to the origin and the original of the Word, B rahma, where the N ame, A urn, and the named, A kshara B rahma, are one and the same. 
1687 :(For further understanding of this mantra reference may be made to Atharva-vediya M andukyo- panishad.) He the All-Saviour pervades the heavens and the earth, which are father and mother of the world of existence. He is the creator and the inspirer of life. He takes on the glory and majesty of existence again and again. He pervades, comprehends and sustains the regions of bliss, the regions of light and the middle regions of the sky. He pervades this entire universe. He is present everywhere, here and now and always. 
1688 :Hethathas realised with mind and soul and thus knows this adorable B rahma may speak to us here and now of It: unmoved and immovable, father of existence, controller and concomitant of the divinities such as sun and moon, innermost creative spirit of M other Nature, the life spirit of the regions of light, ever young beyond age and decay. 
1689 :Ay a visthd janayankarvardni sa hi ghrnirururva- raya gatuh. Sa pratyudaiddharunam madhvo agraih svayd tanvd tanva mairayata. 
1690 :By this particular state of pervasion, sustenance and comprehension, doing cosmic acts of creative evolution, He, refulgent Brahma, is the guide as well as the goal for the man of choice wisdom and action. Arising and manifesting with and in advance of the glorious sustainers of life such as the sun and moon, he inspires and enlivens the universe with his presence. 
1691 :O Vayu, vibrant all-present Spirit of the universe, nobly worshipped with loveand faith, O pranic energy of life, for the realisation of our cherished desire for self-fulfilment, you conduct this body chariot of our earthly existence with one and ten, two and twenty, three and thirty hoiily yoked horse-powers. Pray release ail those here. 
1692 :(Reference may be made to Kathopanishad 1, 1, 3-4, where the human body is called a chariot, the soul, the master, and the senses, the horses, with mind as the driver. Five senses of perception, five senses of volition with mind, the intelIigential complex, are the eleven horses. These eleven are doubled and tripled in our course of life: they are purely eleven in the causal body at the sattvic level, they are twenty-two in the subtle body at the sattvic and rajasic levels, and thirty- three in the gross body at the sattvic, rajasic and tamasic levels. When the human has realised its cherished desire for worldly fulfilment, then it prays for freedom from the bonds of the gross body, and for total freedom of M oksha it prays for total freedom from the bonds. Basically, the bonds are eleven, twenty two and thirty three are versions only.) Enlightened sages of divine nature, as divinities of nature too, join and serve the cosmic yajamana in the yajnic evolution of the world of existence. The ways they serve the Supreme lord through cosmic participation become the first and prime ordinances of life. Those sages, great as they are, enjoy the bliss of heaven w here the ancient sages of di vine potential enjoy the heavenly bliss of eternal life. 
1693 :yajamana manifests, he proceeds further, his manifestation grows higher and higher again and again. Thus Brahma, in the world of existence, becomes the Supreme ordainer and sustainer of the Devas such as sun and moon. May the Lord bless us also with spiritual, moral and social wealth and excellence of high order. 
1694 :When and where the sages offer oblations to the immortal divinities with their immortal mind and soul, there let us too rejoice in the presence of Supreme Brahma and see, directly experience, the presence at early dawn of the sun. 
1695 :W hen the divine sages perform and extend the yajna with oblations of self-surrender in communion with the Purusha, Supreme Brahma, thereby the yajna grows higher and more powerful since they perform the yajna with the exceptional offer of self-sacrifice through total surrender. 
1696 :Divine sages fascinated by the ecstasy of Divinity variously conduct the meditative yajna of spiritual communion with knowledge, in Samprajnata Samadhi, and with parts of Vedic speech, in Savikalpa Samadhi (Patanjali's Yoga-sutras, I, 17 and 42). May the sage who knows of this meditative yajna by experience through mind and soul speak of itto us here and now. 
1697 :(A nother interpretation of yajna by 'Shuna' and 'gobhih', based on Nirukta 9, 4, 4O and 2, 2, 5 has been suggested as 'yajna by air, fire and the sun, with cow's milk and clarified butter.) Prakrti, Nature, is the mother cause of the universe. It is Aditi, the imperishable. It has two dimensions: essential and existential. Essentially it is one, the same ever, imperishable. Existentially it is various in forms. It is constant and also mutable: constant in the essence, mutable in existence. The constant evolves into an infinite variety of forms, and when the evolutionary process of the universe goes full circle, it recedes into the essence. Prakrti is both constant and mutable at the same time in the universe. 
1698 :Prakrti, Nature, isAditi, imperishable, eternal. Dyau, light, the sun, the heavenly region of light, is Aditi. The middle region of the skies is Aditi. Aditi is the mother, mother of the universe. The Supreme Brahma is the father. The soul, the living being, is the child of father and mother. All the divinities of nature and humanity are Aditi, imperishable in the essence. All the five classes of humanity are Aditi. All that is born isAditi All that is to be born isAditi. 
1699 :For our protection, sustenance and progress we invoke and serve great Aditi, creative nature power of the universe, mother of the pious observers of the laws of rectitudeand I ife's disci pi i ne, keeper of theuniverdal laws of divine truth, mighty queen of the earthly order, unaging, expansive beyond bounds, sweet shelter home of all, inviolable, and the generator, preserver and promoter of noble values. (This mantra may also be interpreted as a tribute to M other Earth.) Note: Here starts an alternative numbering of suktas. Sukta 6 has four mantras in one order which is here continued. In another order sukta 6 has two mantras, which have been translated. After these two, mantras 3 and 4 are numbered as Sukta 7, mantras 1 and 2. We continue the numbering as before and give the alternative numbeing in brackets after the mantra. So mantra 3 that now follows will be numbered as (7, 1) at the end of the translation, and similarly the alternative sukta numbers will be written in brackets. 
1700 :Let us all, free from sin, for the sake of well being, success and salvation, mount the divine, life saviour, faultless, perfect boat with efficient oars, structured strongly, without any leakage at all, a sweet shelter for all, firm as earth, bright as heaven, imperishable, sailing across the world to safety and leading to noble destination. 
1701 :This is a description of the boat of life with the compass of Vedic light, knowledge and wisdom. 
1702 :For the growth and development of food, strength and energy and the vibrancy of life, let us celebrate and adore with sincere words of honesty the great Mother, mother earth, imperishable nature and Supreme Divinity, which holds the expansive space in her lap, and let us pray she may bless us with three-fold peace and prosperity of body, mind and soul in a happy home. 
1703 :I have diversified the forms, functions and places of the children, i.e., effectual forms, of Aditi, integrate primordial Prakrti, into Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, i.e., thought, energy and matter, and of the effectual forms of Diti, disintegrate form of Aditi, into discrete forms of elements and energies, all of them divine, expansive, inviolate and inviolable. Deepistheir identity and value in the cosmic context, unfathomable liketheocean's, and thereis nonewho can comprehend them, whatever the effort and investment one may provide. (8,1) (This looks like the voice of the divine spirit of creative evolution of the multitudinous variety of things from one basic root of nature.) O man, go forward on your path from good to better and higher, and may Brhaspati, Lord of expansive universe and master of Vedic speech be your guide and leader. And then on the best part of this blessed earth, make this all-heroic honourable human order free from enmity, dissension and negativity. 
1704 :Pusha, Lord Divine, all sustainer, bright as sun, beatific as moon and inspiring as soma, manifests, pervades, protects and guides on the highest of the paths of existence, on the path of heaven and on the path of the earth. Both of these, paths and havens of life, earthly and heavenly, the path of earthly prosperity, A bhyudaya, and the path of heavenly bliss, Nihshreyas, the Lord pervades, this one here and the other one there, knowing Pusha, lord of life, knows all these paths and quarters of space. May the Lord guide us on in life by the most fearless paths of heaven and earth. May the lord giver of peace, prosperity and all round well being, all refulgent, all potent, all knowing, guide and lead us forward without relent. 
1705 :O Pusha, lord of life and rectitude, pray guide us that we may never fail in the observance of your law and vows of discipline. We are your celebrants and worshippers here every moment of our life. 
1706 :May Pusha, lord all-protective, give us the umbrella of his generous right hand from above, far and near. May our lost strength come back to us. May we O mother Sarasvati, that swelling treasure trove of your affectionate nourishment, abundant, refreshing, gracious, spontaneous and generous by which you fulfill all the cherished desires of your children, pray open, extend, and let it flow to us. 
1707 :O mother shower of nature's bounty, Sarasvati, this reverberating thunder that is yours, the divine cloud of rain that adorns the world like a banner of royalty is yours. Pray let it not destroy us with lightning. O divine cloud, pray let not our crops of grain be parched and Let the Samiti and the Sabha, Senate and the Assembly, cooperative creations of Prajapati, organismicallyrel ated to th e r u I er of th e peo p I e, p rotect, support and promote me. Whoever I meet should enlighten and support me, and I too would speak, O City fathers, properly to all those who assemble and meet in the Assembly Hall. 
1708 :O Sabha, we know you well in reality, you are the adorable favourite of the people. Therefore, whoever be your members, they should speak supportingly in unison. 
1709 :Of all these members sitting in the Assembly I recognise and accept the knowledge and intention, and I do them honour for that. O Ruler, Indra, lord of the people, make me the partner, honoured of thisAssembly. 
1710 :O members of the Assembly, if your mind and affiliation is disturbed, divided, gone away elsewhere to other loyalties, committed here or there, that we call back home to this A ssembly and to this ruler. Pray, let your mind be committed to me, to the Assembly and nowhere else. 
1711 :Just as the rising sun takes away the lustre of the night stars, similarly I takeaway the lustre and power of the men and women opposed to me. 
1712 :O rivals and adversaries, of as many of you as come and see me advancing, I take away the power and lustre of the enemies as the rising sun takes away the light of those lost in sleep. 
1713 :I worship the refulgent, divine, all-inspiring Savita, poetic creator of protective earth and light giving heaven, who brings about this yajnic creation of existential truth and holds the jew el wealth of the world for us. DearestisHe, knowledge, wisdom and love Itself. 
1714 :Sublime is the light of his glory, beyond comprehension, which shines in adoration of his Order. 
1715 :Golden-handed, noblest creator, he alone with his love and grace creates the heaven of supreme bliss. 
1716 :Self-refulgent divine Savita is the creator of the fi rst and prime father generator of I ife, the sun, and al so the creator of the refulgent body and vast space of heaven for it and for this humanity. May the divine creator create for us cherished gifts of life and ample cattle wealth day by day. 
1717 :May generous Savita, friend of the household, bear and bring for parents of the home choice gifts, jewel wealth and values of life, strength and skill, and long age of good health and joy. May he cherish the soma of their homely yajna and givethejoy of self-fulfilment to each wedded couple as the yajamana couple moves on in life, observing the rules of this lord Savita's law. 
1718 :O lord creator, Savita, I choose and pray for that noble knowledge, wisdom, understanding and culture, truth inspiring, wonderfully unique and universal, abundant giver of fulfilment in a thousand streams, which the mighty saint and sagely scholar prayed for and received for the achievement of honour, prosperity and excellence of life. 
1719 :O lord of the boundless, protector of the great, Brhaspati, O Savita, all creator, all inspirer, exalt this, enlighten this, this man, this ruler, this human nation, for the achievement of grandeur, prosperity and excel Ience. R efi ne and sharpen this devotee to the razor- edge of perfection, and then let all the divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity be happy and rejoice with May Lord of the universe, ruler of the worlds, Dhata, sustainer of all, give us wealth, honour and excellence, give us in full, to our total self-fulfilment. 
1720 :May Dhata, lord sustainer of the universe, bless the generous giver with prime life and vitality of inviolable order. Let us pray for the wisdom and goodwill of the divine gracious lord of universal perfection, power and prosperity. 
1721 :May the lord sustainer of power, prosperity and perfection, Dhata, give choice gifts of life for the generous giver praying for progeny in his home. May the generous sages and scholars, all divinities of nature, inviolable mother earth, all together in love and cooperation, bring him immortal gifts of life. 
1722 :May Dhata, all-sustainer, Rati, all giver, Savita, all inspirer, Prajapati, protector and ruler of living beings, Nidhipati, protector and controller of the treasure of the world, and Agni, leader and giver of enlightenment, love, guide and bless this happy home of ours. May Tvashta, divine maker of forms of existence, Vishnu, lord omnipresent and all pervasive, munificent all giver, givetotheyajamanawealth, honour and excellence with noble progeny. 
1723 :Burst open, O regions of the firmament, Prthivi, break this divine cloud, and O Dhata, lord sustainer, ruler of heaven and earth, open the treasure hold of divine waters of rain for us. 
1724 :Let the blazing sun not parch us. Let no cold and frost strike us. Let the generous sky stream down showers of rain. W here nature's greenery, soma, grows profusely, there is good fortune, and waters of rain showers, nectar ghrta of prosperity, always. 
1725 :Prajapati generates these living beings. May Dhata, lord sustainer, kind and gracious, sustain and promote them. Common of natural origin, common of thought and mind, of the same common birth they are, all. May the lord of growth and sustenance bless me with strength and vigour. 
1726 :Let common agreement of our minds carry the fragrance of our yajna daily to the divinities of nature. Let the fruit of our creative action with united minds reach the noblest minds of the nation and daily win their j oyous approval. A nd I et the f i re of yajna be the carrier and harbinger of our havi and its fragrant fruit for me too, the giver in yajna. 
1727 :O Anumati, union of minds, common will, pray honour and approve our yajnic action and bring us good, peace and prosperity. Accept our havi offered into the fire and, O Spirit divine, bless us with noble progeny. 
1728 :Note: Anumati has metaphorically been interpreted as wife of the yajamana. So if husband and wife are of one mind, love reigns in the home, and the result of conjugal yajna is bound to be sweet and fragrant. That result is noble progeny. 
1729 :May the Lord Almighty, accepting our united action, bring us imperishable wealth, honour and excellence with noble progeny. May we never suffer the Lord's anger and disapproval. May wealways abide in H is good will and favour of grace. 
1730 :O Anumati, spirit of union of minds, Supraniti, spirit of noble, positive and united policy of advancement, by that name and honour of yours as A numati which is adorable, generous and agreeable, O spiritof universality, fulfil our yajnic action with success and, O Spirit of glory and good fortune, bless us with wealth, honour and excellence with progeny, worthy of the brave. 
1731 :To this yajna of our union nobly performed, Anumati, spirit of union of thought, word and action, has come for the glory of a noble social order of the brave blest with honour and excellence. Nobleand holy is her providence and prospect. So may she, protector and promoter of the divines, protect, promote and exalt Anumati, dynamic spirit of integrative thought and will, is all this, i.e., pervades and inspires all this that stands, moves and agitates to evolve and move forward as one sociopolitical organismic organisation. O divine spirit of union and progress, Anumati, let us abidein your good will and accept us for favour of your pleasure and grace. 
1732 :Come you all, people of the world, with one voice, in your own words, together, to the Lord of light and splendour and the bliss of heaven. He is One, omnipresent and omnificent, worthy of reverence and worship for all people, arising in human consciousness, like a visitor to the home. He is eternal and manifests, shining anew in the latest forms of evolving existence, and the entire worlds of the dynamic universe revolve roundThatOneonly, intheirorbit, and ultimately return unto Him. 
1733 :This One Spirit of the expansive universe, light of life manifesting in infinite forms and functions of existence, is the vision and intelligence of the poets for our experience in a thousand different ways. 
1734 :Bradhna, infinite Spirit of the universe, self- refulgent as the sun, elevates, raises and radiates the dawns, equal and alike together, immaculate, illuminative and exalting, revealing the world for our enlightenment and inspiration in speech everyday. 
1735 :Evil dreams, desecration of life, violence, adversity, malignity, dishonour, and all evil tongues, these we eliminate from ourselves. 
1736 :That wealth, honour, knowledge and glory which Indra, mighty ruler, discovered and dug out, what Agni, the leading scholar, Vishvedeva, all brilliant men of the world, M aruts, vibrant citizens, and thunderous warriors discovered, created and achieved, may Savita, brilliant and inspiring Prajapati, sustainer of the people dedicated to Dharma in unison with the noble will of the people may give to us. 
1737 :Let the first invocation reach both Vishnu and Varuna, by whose power worlds of the universe are sustained in order, who by their might are highest and supreme over all, and who, irresistible and inviolable, with their omnipotence rule the universe. 
1738 :Within whose presence, power and order, and by whose law, power and universal acts of nature, all that shines in space, all that breathes and all that sees, is comprehended and sustained, to that Vishnu and to that Varuna let our first invocation and prayer reach. 
1739 :Let us sing and celebrate the great divine exploits of Vishnu who creates all regions of the natural world of existence, who sustains the higher regions of heaven, and who, most adored and adorable, sustains the universe three ways: creating, maintaining and For these mighty exploits Vishnu is celebrated and adored, indeed the Lord himself reveals these exploits in the divine hymns of the Veda. He pervades the universe, mountains, caves and the clouds, as an awesome lion roams around at will over tortuous paths of the forest. May the Lord come, manifest in the cave of the heart and bless us from farthest of the far. 
1740 :In your three boundless steps of creative evolution, Sattva-rajas-tamas, Mind-energy-matter, heaven-sky-earth, are contained, comprehended and sustained the entire worlds of the universe. May you, O Vishnu, come from the farthest, let your infinite presence arise, and let our spirit too arise into awareness of Infinity. O Ghrtayoni, treasure-hold of nectar-grace, accept the soma of our yajnic adoration and let the yajnapati cross over the seas of mortality to immortal bliss. 
1741 :Vishnu created the threefold universe of mind, motion and matter through three steps of evolution of Pradhana, subtle elements and gross materials, shaped the materials into threefold form of heaven, skies and earth, and set the form, the mystery that it is, into space and time. 
1742 :Vishnu, intrepidable, potent protector and sustainer of the w orl d of exi stence, created the threefoI d order of the universe and pervades it, thereby ordai ning and sustaining the laws of its creative evolution, sustenance and involution. 
1743 :Watch the acts of Vishnu whereby He reveals the laws of existence and the rules of conduct and whereby I see the rules and laws and bind myself in discipline. I am the friend of Indra at his service, and H e is the friend of the human soul. 
1744 :The eminent brave, scholars, sages and devotees always see that supreme power and presence of Vishnu pervasive in the universe just as we see the sun, allwatching eye of the world, shining in heaven. 
1745 :O Vishnu, Lord omnipresent, all commanding, we pray: From the regions of heaven give us light, from the vast sky give us energy, from the earth give us food and plenty with peace and joy, and from the womb of nature, M ahat form of the creative mode, bless us and fill our life to the full with both hands right and left, from both sides, right and left. 
1746 :May Ida, divine Word and sacred knowledge, refine and adorn uswith culture and enlightenmentwith the sense of duty and discipline, for in her light and presence, men dedicated to divinity and nobility are blest and sanctified. It is refinement and grace itself, powerful and inspiring, established in soma bliss of divinity, rooted in yajna, and relates to all the powers and phases of Divinity manifested in nature and humanity. May this Word, knowledge, abide with us in all our yajnic performances of life. 
1747 :May the Veda be the harbinger of the good for us in life. May the grinder be good and used for the good purpose. May the knife be good and be used for positive purpose. May the yajna altar be good and bring us good fortune. May our axe be good and be used only for good and peaceful purposes. May divine sages and brilliant scholars, lovers of yajnic company and social creativity, dedicated to yajna and bearing offers of holy materials, love and join this yajna of learning, science and social creativity of universal value. 
1748 :Agna-Vishnu, fire and the sun, fire and cosmic yajna, great is your grandeur and glory. You consume as well as protect, for sure, the hidden essence and power of ghrta, joyous flow of the beauty and sweetness of life. Bearing seven jewels of the beauty, power and prosperity of life in and to every home, may your flames and rays of light receive the ghrta of homely yajna. 
1749 :Agna-Vishnu, fire and sun, fire and yajna, dear and high is your place, position and law in human life. Loving and joining the secret power and graces of yajna ghrta, you accept, enjoy and augment the secret efficacy of ghrta. Growing and rising with progress and well being in every home, may the flames and rays receive the ghrta oblations and in response augment and exalt the grace and glory of the home. 
1750 :Heaven and earth anoint me with honour and grace, M itra, this friendly sun and the day, bless me with lustre and grace, Brahmanaspati, master of divine knowledge and the Vedic voice, bless me with refinement of culture and knowledge, and Savita, the rising sun, inspires me with freshness, vitality and holy genius. 
1751 :Indra, lord of glory, power and force, ruler of the world, energise and vitalise us with the maximum best and highest possible powers of protection and promotion now and always. W hoever hates us must go off and down, and whatever we hate may lose the pranic vitality. 
1752 :Bearing yajnic homage of havi and adamantine strength of vital ity, we approach the dear, adorable, ever youthful Agni, rising by oblations of havi into the holy fire, and pray may the yajna-fire and lord of light grant us good health and long age. 
1753 :May the M aruts, refreshing breezes, refresh and energise me, may Pusha, lord of health and nourishment, Brhaspati, lord of expansive nature and natural knowledge of life, and this Agni, fire and passion of will for action and enlightenment, bless me wholly with progeny, wealth and long age of good health and make me strong against all odds. 
1754 :Agni, lord of light and fire, omnipresent in existence, inviolable power of nature and the world, ward off my adversaries arisen against me. Throw off the adversaries upfront against me. Throw off the adversaries rising against my power and prestige. Throw down and subdue the enemies fighting againstme. May we be and abide sinless and strong for mother earth and her children against all odds. 
1755 :O J ataveda, all knowing, supreme protector and ruler of all that is, with your courage, power and patience, challenge and face all others, rivals and adversaries, those who are arisen and those that might arise, and throw them out. Raise and exalt this Rashtra, this commonwealth of the people's social order, to fullness of prosperity and glory, and then let all devas, noble citizens of the land, rejoice with you in the state of glory and prosperity. 
1756 :These veins of your system which are in hundreds and the nerves and arteries which are in thousands I watch, and the loophole or leakage of them all I have close up with innviolable cover. 
1757 :Whatever is beyond your seat of being and governance I bring into the reach of the Rashtra, so that neither the people nor their children of the rising generation may ever fall foul of you. Thus I make you free from all selfish interest and from familial favouritism and give you a corselet of steel for defence of your person and the commonwealth against all odds from within and from without. 
1758 :Our eyes are honey sweet, alike in mutual expression, our complexions, creamy smooth, pray be you in my heart and keep mein yours, and let our minds be one in unanimity. 
1759 :With cloth woven with love born of the heart and mind, I tie the knot and hold you to me so that you would beonly with mein ioveand would not even think, much less speak, of others. 
1760 :I bring up and offer you this herbal token of love for me which is self-attractive and love afflictive exclusively towards me with freedom from fear. It would make you pine for me from afar, bring you back and exhilarate you with joy when you arrive back home. 
1761 :It is inspiring for the mind and heart, Asuri, the same which raises I ndra, the soul, to a superior position over the other noble peopl e. B y that I bind you to me so that I would be the only and exclusive love of yours in life. 
1762 :You are a metaphor of the moon before me in beauty. You are a metaphor of the sun before me in brilliance. You are an embodiment of all nobilities of the world before me. That's why and how we praise and exalt you. 
1763 :It is I who would speak here, notyou.You speak and declare in the assembly: You be only mine, do not even think, much less speak, of others. 
1764 :If you are far away from our people, if you are beyond the rivers, this herbal token of love would draw you back home as the one tied in bond, as you are. 
1765 :May the Lord bring in to our land rain showers of the cloud, divine bird like the sun, bearing abundant milk of life, condensed body of waters, life giver of herbs, filling theearth with showersfalIing in rain, laden with wealth. 
1766 :For our protection, promotion, peace and progress, we invoke the generous Lord of the showers of life, light and wealth, Sarasvan, in whose law all living beings live and work, in whose law and discipline all the waters flow, and in whose law and discipline the life giver of mother nature, Pusha, the sun, is established in orbit. 
1767 :Loving, dedicated and abiding here in divine law, we invoke the innermost presence of divine Sarasvan, Lord of the showers of light and life, direct giver of fulfilment to the generous self-sacrificer, giver of refulgence to the sun, promoter of life, treasure-hold of all wealth, promoter of the world's wealth of nourishment for nature and humanity, and the ultimate seed and seat of all wealth, honour and excellence. The Lord is Shravasyu, He listens, we invoke and adore. 
1768 :Lord Almighty, refulgent as Shyena, the celestial sun, pervades across the spaces and the regions of water, breaks the clouds over desert lands and, ultimately, destroys them all, too, watching the end of it all. May the Lord, all watchful of humanity, crossing over regions of the universe hitherward, come and be kind to us with love as friend of the human soul. 
1769 :Lord Almighty, Shyena, divine bird of infinite power and motion, all moving universal presence, eternal home and origin of countless regions, wielder and giver of food, health and power, may He, all watching lord ruler of humanity, give us wealth, honour and excellence, peace and settlement which may belike our ancestral heritage from our forefathers brought from the farthest high. 
1770 :O Soma, herbal medication, and Rudra, pranic vitality, physician and the H ealth-care system, cure and root out the disease that has entered our body, home and society. Ward off the infectious and contagious calamity with curative and preventive measures and thus release us from the evil. 
1771 :O Soma and Rudra, ruler and physician, both of you strengthen our body system with all these medical efficacies. Throw out of us and release usfrom whatever ailment persists in our bodies for reasons of weakness or trespass we might have committed and suffered. 
1772 :One order of your language is good, positive, auspicious and peaceable, the other is not good, it is negative, inauspicious and full of strife. The human bei ng, though comfortable at heart, bears both the orders within. Another way, man bears three orders of language in the mind, they are Ida, the absolute, Sarasvati, the sacred universal, and Bharati, the language in use. (Yet another way, man bears four orders of language in the mind, they are Para, the absolute, Pashyanti, the conceivable, Madhyama, the thought form, and Vaikhari, the language in use.) Of these three, (or four) embedded in the mind within, one, Bharati, orVaikhari, the language in use, auspicious as well as inauspicious, goes forward in objective form through the medium of speech. 
1773 :Vishnu, omnipresent Divinity, Indra, omnipotent force of Divinity, you are always victorious, you are never defeated, no one can subdue you. W hen you both challenge, you subdue the enemy you fight thousands and three-ways disperse them. 
1774 :(Indra and Vishnu have been interpreted by Swami D ayananda as commander of theforces and ruler of a Rashtra. On the cosmic level, Vishnu may be interpreted as the omnipresent creator, and Indra, as his cosmic will, and the battles as the dynamics of evolution three-ways: Sattva, Rajas and Tamas modes of Prakrti. In the spiritual sense, Vishnu may be interpreted as the divine presence, and Indra as as the human soul. When the human being acts under the umbrella of God, all adversarial negativities are subdued.) From a far off people really interested in the good of humanity, from the sea and people with equally broad mind that far, I believe, you have been brought and dev el oped as a sure cure for j eal ousy. 
1775 :Like fire extinguished by water, calm down the jealousy of this man burning like blazing fire, indeed blazing like forest fire by itself without obstruction. 
1776 :(What could be the antidote or cure: It could be a herb or a learned psychiatrist.) O Sinivali, gracious lady of the home, beautiful and adorable, you area sister of divinities, the very spirit of fertility. Pray love and accept the sacred gift of love of conjugality and bless us with noble progeny. 
1777 :Noble of arms and delicate of fingers, leading light of peace and conjugal prosperity, mother of the brave is the liberal lady of the home. Offer the best and loveliest homage to the mother of the nation, maker of the home, the very spirit of grace and fertility. 
1778 :O Si nival i, mother of the nation's children, first and only lady of Indra, master of the home, celebrated by thousands, divine spirit moving forward, favourite sustainer of Vishnu, yajnic system of the family institution, we offer you gifts of love and homage of sanctity. O Spirit of divine fertility, inspire your husband for the achievement of success, prosperity and excellence of life. 
1779 :I invoke and invite 'Kuhu', adorable lady of sweet word and voice, divine of mien and noble in manners, enlightened and wise in action, to join me in this holy home yajna of conjugality, and pray may she give us the progeny of noble wealth of character and universal value, admirable, brave and creative in a hundred ways. 
1780 :F avourite of the people of di vine know ledge and character, sustainer of life's immortal values, intimate friend and companion, may kuhu, the sweet and lovely lady, accept this offer of homage. May she listen now and join our home yajna of conjugality with love in full awareness and bring us prosperity of health and happiness with wealth and advancement at the present time. 
1781 :With sweetest words of love and adoration I solicitmy nobleand admirablelady loveof light, Raka, who, harbinger of all good fortune, I pray, may listen to me, appreciate my sincerity from the depth of her heart, give me a brave, adorable progeny of hundredfold creativity, and thus weave the web of familial duties with the faultless needle of love and wisdom in conjugal cooperation. 
1782 :O Raka, lovely lady of light and generosity, noble are your thoughts and plans, and beautiful your acts of homely management by which you bring in the wealth and pleasures of a happy home to the generous man. With all these, O blessed harbinger of good fortune, happy at heart, come now and bless us, giving a thousand gifts of growth and prosperity. 
1783 :May the Devapatnis, noble consorts of blessed people, like the essential powers of the divinities of nature, doing good to all with love and passion, protect us for strength and advancement and for success and victory in the fields of life's struggle for progress. All those that are on earth and are active in human affairs, like nature's divinities on the earth and in the waters, abiding by the laws of nature and the laws and discipline of humanity, divine and adorable, provide us peace, protection and comfortable settlement in happy homes. 
1784 :Let all divine women, like words of Divinity, all Devapatnis, Indrani, first lady like light of the sun, Agnayi, consort of the leader like the heat of fire, Ashvini, women in the field of speed and technology, likelightof the sun and moon, Rodasi, consort of Rudra, powers of health and justice like heaven and earth, Varunani, consort of Varuna, powers of security and punishment, like fluidity of water, listen and help us according to women's seasons. 
1785 :j ust as lightning always strikes the tree down without exception or obstruction, so shall I round up and smite the gambler without relent by the force of law. 
1786 :Whether they are smart rich wasters or simple hard-pressed fools, let the entire power and money of people addicted to gambling come under my control confiscated under law by Aksharaja, controller of gambling. 
1787 :I adoreAgni, Ruler and leader, who holds and controls the nation's own wealth without any debt. Let him, concentrated on the commonwealth, take stock of our actions and achievements in the field of wealth and production. As I raise the wealth and honour of the nation as with chariots laden with wealth and victory, so do I receive as well as promote the honour and prestige of our vibrant people and our forces. 
1788 :With you as Ruler and leader for our guidance, let us win over the surrounding rivals and adversaries. P ray reserve for us our share i n every struggle for victory and prosperity. O Indra, lord of glory, whatever is best for us, make that simple and straight for us to achieve, and break down the force and morale of the opponents. 3T^f T^TT uTrt'RsId^bWd I have conquered you even though guarded in a fort surrounded by a moat, and I crush whatever evil you have done as a wolf crushes a sheep. 
1789 :And an expert player with initiative and at calculated risk takes on the advancing adversary and wins and, like a master gamesman, collects his innings at the end of game time. Then, if he, like a lover of divinities and positive achievement, preserves but does not block his money, the wealth, of its own productive nature and potential, creates more and more for him (he being an expert player and user of money). 
1790 :O Ruler, universally loved and invoked, let us solve the difficult problem of ignorance and poverty by education, and development of land and cattle. Let us solve the problem of hunger by the development of barley. Let us be the first among independent nations and, healthy and unviolated, let us win wealth by our efforts in our own ways. 
1791 :With action in my right hand, success and victory lies collected in the left. Let me be the winner of cows, lands and culture, horses and achievement, money and wealth of gold and grace. 
1792 :O citizens of the land, active, enlightened and balanced all in your orbit, give me brilliant fruitful knowledge of life and the world like the mother cow overflowing with milk, and join mewith themain stream of action at the optimum as the string binds the bow at both ends. 
1793 :May B rhaspati, sagely scholar of the Veda, with divine knowledge, protect us all round from behind, from above and from below against evil doers. May Indra, the ruler, protect us against evil doers from the front and from within, friend of friends as he is, and may he raise us to superior virtue and eminence. 
1794 :Let us have harmony and unanimity of mind with our people around, also harmony and unanimity of mind and understanding with the distant and the foreigners. O Ashvins, complementary powers of senior's communication, mother and father, teacher and preacher, authorities of government and law, in life here, give us harmony, unanimity and mutual understanding of perception, opinion and will in life and corporate affairs. 
1795 :With equanimity of mind and soul let us know and be together in harmony. Being knowledgeable with divine mind and soul in unanimity, let us never disagree, never part, never divide. Even when mighty deadly occasions arise, let no voices of dissent and division arise so that when the day of reckoning arrives, the strike of Indra, ruler and ultimate master, falls not on us. 
1796 :O Agni, lord of lifeand light, and sinceyou have saved us from the possible malediction of Yama, lord of life and death, and his justice beyond there in the other world, and from the justice of Brhaspati, Spirit of expansive nature's dynamics of change, now, O Lord, we pray, may theA shvins, physicians of divinities, prana and apana energies, with their power and acts, ward off death from us before fullness and achievement of fulfilment. 
1797 :O prana and apana, Ashvins, divine energies and harbingers of good health, cometogether, do notforsake the body of man. O man, let prana and apana together be here with you. Live a full hundred years, growing and advancing in health and age. Agni is your protector, supreme promoter, highest, best and most refulgent guardian. 
1798 :O man, if your life's vitality is run out for any reason, internal or external, let the two, prana and apana energies, come back again. Agni, life's living vitality, would bring you back from the clutches of calamity. That living vitality, life energy, I restore into your body, mind and soul. 
1799 :Let not prana forsake this person. Let not apana leave him and go out. I entrust this person to the vitality and energies of Saptarshis, i.e., five senses, mind and intelligence, or, five main pranas, Dhananjaya prana and Sutratma, cosmic spiritual vitality, which may support, sustain and conduct him with peace and comfort unto full old age. 
1800 :O prana and apana vitalities, enter this person with your energy and vitality like two chariot bulls taking to the road to conduct the master to his destination. This person is a living treasure-hold of health and age, which, on your entry, may grow and go on forward on life's journey without hurt or damage here. 
1801 :O man, we inspire and vitalise your pranic energy from strength to strength. We devitalise and throw outyour consumptive negativities. May this Agni, vital heat and energy of health, cherished and adorable, bring us health and long age from all sides in all ways. 
1802 :May we, rising higher and higher beyond the dark to the highest heaven, reach the sun, highest light of the high, divinest of the divines. 
1803 :We honour and live and work by Rks and Samans, hymns of knowledge and joy of piety and devotion. People perform their duties and do their work by knowledge and the value of knowledge and work for joyous fulfilment. These two, Rks and Samans, therefore, shine in the meeting hall of the enlightened, sustain and extend joint actions of holiness among the wise and lead them to success. 
1804 :I have asked for and tri ed to know by R ks, I earn the value by Samans, and perform by application of the Yajus, hymns of knowledge applied. And I have asked for and learnt the materials of yajna in action in pursuit of strength and lustre for life. Therefore, I pray, O Shachipati, Indra, lord of noble action, let this knowledge, Veda, asked for and received, not lead me, for that reason of attainment, to violence against others and ultimately to violence against me. 
1805 :O Vasu, lord giver of peace and settlement, all those paths of yours by which you move the world of existence onward are paths of heavenly light here on earth. By those very paths of light, pray, establish us in a lifeof peace and progress withoutviolenceto anyone. 
1806 :This herb has destroyed the poison received from the bite of a striped, black, poisonous snake. 
1807 :This herb is born of honey, full of honey, honey sweet, honey itself. It is M ashaka-jambhani, killer of mosquitoes, and it is an antidote of deadly poison. 
1808 :Where the bite is, from where the blood has been sucked, from there we remove the little smarting mosquito's poison already rendered ineffective. 
1809 :O Brahmanaspati, physician, this patient is twisted in body, his joints are slack, his limbs are crippled, his mouth, face, teeth and tongue are all deformed and crooked, all these he twists and twirls. P ray put them back i n proper shape and order as munj a grass. 
1810 :I destroy the poison of this bloodless scorpion coming up crawling from below, and I have crushed it. 
1811 :O Scorpion, there is no strength in your arms, nor in the head, nor in the middle of the body. Then by what mischievous evil do you hold the little but smarting poison in your tail-sting? O Scorpion, O snake, the ants eat you up. The peahens cut up and eat you up. Be careful, O people, and warn well against the sapless poison of the scorpion and the snake. 
1812 :O Scorpion, you attack with both the tail and the mouth. In your mouth there is no poison. Then how come there is poison in the tail? If I am agitated at heart while speaking and dealing with peoplewith expectation, or for solicitation, or with commitment, then denied and hurt, then whatever is bruised at the core of my heart and soul, may Sarasvati repair that damage with the balmy softness of her creamy wisdom. 
1813 :Seven gifts of M other Nature, five senses with mind and intelligence, five pranas with Sutratma and Dhananjaya, bring showers of milky nourishment for the vibrant soul residing in the body, as children do good and bring hope and fulfilment to the parent, and they also abide by the laws of eternal truth as they serve the soul. Also, there are two other potentials which serve the soul, they shine and bring light and lustre for it, they are both active, and both nourish, promote and advance it in life. These are prana and apana energies Indra and Varuna, sun and moon, winds and waters, powers of governance and law and justice, ruler and people, seasoned and disciplined in your own law and function, protectors and promoters of your own creations, come, promote and taste of this exhilarating soma of joy distilled for you. May your chariot of love and non-violence move by paths of rectitude and visit every home every day for the protection, promotion and exhilaration of the sagely divines and brilliant people. 
1814 :Indra and Varuna, generous and virile, give us profuse showers of the sweetest and most exciting soma. H ere is this food prepared and seasoned for you, come, be seated onthisvedi, enjoy and promote our happiness and prosperity. 
1815 :W hoever curses us who curse not, and whoever curses us though we too revile the curse, would dry up and die out like a tree struck by lightning, upto the very roots. 
1816 :Bearing strength and enthusiasm, comfortable with money and success, happy at heart and noble in understanding and intelligence, I come and take residence in the home with the inmates, looking at all with a loving friendly eye, full of respect for all. O friends and members of the family, enjoy yourselves, fear nothing, not me. (Thus the house-holder enters the new home, let us say, to settle after his education and training. 
1817 :These homes with their inmates are happy and peaceful, full of food, energy and enthusiasm, and they stay overflowing with cherished wealth, beauty and joy. And let them welcome us as we come and join. 
1818 :These are homes which the man for long away wistfully remembers, in which dwell many people happy at heart. Such homes we visualise and long for. May those who dwell there know and welcome us, new comers who join them. 
1819 :Invited and welcome are people, enjoy with ample wealth, be friendly, good at heart and joyous. O inmates of the homes, be free from hunger and thirst, fear us not, enjoy yourselves. 
1820 :Let cows be happy and welcome here. Let sheep and goats be welcome and happy. The best and most delicious foods and drinks are brought in here in our homes. 
1821 :I nmates of the home, be dedicated to holy truth and the law of divinity, be noble and prosperous, have ample food and drink, be comfortable, merry at heart and joyous. Let there be all freedom from hunger and thirst. N othing to fear from us. 
1822 :f%cT T?T -qpf TTTrT fa yell' ^nM|(u|' WTcTI fmnfiq w ^mrf wsm -q^rf n vs u Be here, go not away, be happy and prosperous in all ways, all forms, and all conditions of lifeand grow higher. I come with all good fortune. Grow many and prosperous with me. 
1823 :Agni, lord of light, enlightened teacher and guide, when with relentless rule of austerity we undertake the hard disci pi i ne of study and trai ni ng w hi ch is pursued without reservation and remiss, then let us be dear dedicated favourites of mother Shruti, Veda, and live a long life with good health and noble intelligence of high order. 
1824 :Agni, lord of light and Vedic wisdom, we undertake and pursue the discipline of tapas and austerity. We maintain and sustain the discipline with close watch without relent or reservation. Listening constantly to the words of Shruti, blest and beatified, let us grow on with good health, long age and high intelligence of the order of genius. 
1825 :protector of Truth and the truthful, conquers the pedestrian fighters like a chariot hero. Leader and pioneer, shining in glory at the centre of the earth, may he crush the onslaughts of strife and hostility under the foot. 
1826 :With hymns of adoration we invoke and call Agni, conqueror of hosts, patient, challenging and subduing, to come from the farthest of far places, and we pray to the pioneer warring Agni that he may lead us successfully across all strongholds of the enemy and destroy all evils and despicables of life from the earth. 
1827 :This black and powerful bird-like shadow of darkTamas, evil, flies from thedeep unknown and grips the mind, from which, I pray, may A pah, dynamic spirit of omnipresent Divinity and my own strength of initiative, save me, and absolve me of all that sin and evil. 
1828 :This black and powerful bird-like shadow of darkTamas, evil, O Nir-rti, Adversity, is soiled with the forebodings of calamity, from which. I pray, may Agni, light of omniscience, and the divine fire of homeyajna save me and absolve me of evil. 
1829 :Apamarga, of reverting and reverted growth is your fruit, you grow all-cure, versatile: Reversion of disease is the result. Pray throw off all cursed diseases from us to farthest of the far distance. 
1830 :Whatever evil, dirty or sinful act we have done and suffer, O Apamarga, all-cure versatile, we wash off by you. 
1831 :Whether we suffer from black teeth, deformed nails, or crooked limbs, we ward off all that by you, Apamarga. 
1832 :That presence and omniscience of universal spirit which vibrates in space, in the wind, which is in trees, which is in herbs and grasses, which men of vision and imagination visualise and hear manifesting omnipresent, may that divine presence of Brahma and the divine Voice come and bless us again and again, constantly. 
1833 :Let the power and functions of the senses come to me again, let the soul again attain to existential identity, let wealth, honour and excellence, and let the Voice and knowledge of Brahman, the Eternal Spirit, come to me again. Let the holy fires of yajna arise and shine for me again, let intelligence and mind with intellect, understanding, will and passion come again, al I i n proper order and make me potent and perfect here itself in the living world. 
1834 :Mother Sarasvati, inspiring spirit of omniscience, pray accept our homage of oblations and actions dedicated o your disciplines in various fields of your divine refulgence and, O mother of light and knowledge, bless uswith brilliant progeny educated and cultured in those disciplines. 
1835 :M other Sarasvati, this is our homage to you in the form of our best of knowledge and enlightenment, this is our parent's and teachers' homage of knowledge and enlightenment in the best of words and taste, and these are, in fact, your own most inspiring and enlightening gifts of peaceful and creative knowledge and wisdom arisen in the mind, by which, we pray, we may live a happy enlightened life with the sweetness of universal culture. 
1836 :M other Sarasvati, be kind, most gracious, and ever compassionate. Let us never be deprived of your presence and your grace. 
1837 :Let the winds blow at peace for peace and exhilaration for us. Let the sun shine in peace for peace and warmth of I ife for us. Let the days be bright at peace and give us peace and joy. May the night bring us peace and bliss. May the dawn bring us peace and joy with Shyena, the Eagle in this sukta is a metaphor of defence forces which must pounce upon the enemy before he strikes. 
1838 :W hatever the enemy is able to muster up with intention, thought and planning, whatever with words and propaganda, with all his joint efforts and allies, materials and his tactics of application and execution, all that preparation and plan of his, our deadly defence forces of destruction and deprivation, having known in advance, must counter and destroy before he stri kes and accomplishes his object. 
1839 :Raksha, forces of the watch and reconnaissance, Yatudhana, forces of attack in advance, Nir-rti, his own state of deprivation, these, by reasons of the falsehood of his intention and design, would destroy the enemy's simulation of truth and rectitude. Let the brilliant forces inspired and reinforced by the ruler, Indra, shake and rout his forces. W hatever he plans and tries to execute must not be allowed to be accomplished. 
1840 :Like two royal eagles pouncing upon the prey, let the supreme ruler and the supreme commander of the forces destroy the means, materials and forces of the enemy that attacks us. 
1841 :I nail those two columns of your army already reverted and retreated, and thus I seal your advance also. It is by the force and terror of brilliant fire power that I destroy your force and the entire infrastructure. 
1842 :I nail your arms and the army. I shut your advance. By the force and power of terrible Agni, fire, Agni, O supreme commander, fiery leader, first, perfect and impenetrable like a formidable fort, day in and day out we think of, remember and do homage to you, veteran wise, embodiment of patience, fortitude and unchallengeable might, image of terror, and shaker and destroyer of the violent and the killer. 
1843 :A rise, O friends, watch out for the seasonal share of Indra, supreme ruler. If it is ripe and ready, offer. If not yet ripe and ready, wait, accelerate and exhilarate. 
1844 :I ndra, the havi is ripe and ready. Pray come, the sun is half way up on its path. Friends sit around with their treasure sweets for you like heads of families waiting for the chief on the round. 
1845 :I believe the havi is ripe and ready at dawn in the cow's udders. It is ripe and seasoned on the fire. This process of nature and fire, the eternal law, is universal, ancient, yet it is ever new too. O lord of thunder and justice, universal cause of action, loving and sociable, come and taste of the milky sweets of midday's yajna of action and celebrative homage. 
1846 :Harbingers of the dawn, mighty generous A shvins, chariot heroes of heavens, lighted is the fire, the flames of yajna are rising, honeyed milk of mother nature is flowing. Rejoicing together in yajnic homes, we invoke you and, poets of nature as we are, we celebrate and adore you in divine revelry. 
1847 :Mighty generousA shvins, thefire is lighted, the yajna is hot and rising refulgentfor you. Pray come, the cows are being milked and, O angels of beauty, grace and glory, the learned sages rejoice and celebrate. 
1848 :Consecrated and conducted with oblations capped with selfless, 'svaha', pure and shining yajna in the assembly of the learned is a metaphor of the heavenly bowl of the Ashvins, fit for joyous soma drink of divinities, which all the immortalities of nature and brilliancies of humanity cherish with love, and they tdoration and taste the nectar with the first rays of the sun, father sustainer of the earth. 
1849 :Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn, men and women who are harbingers of the day's activities, the ghrta which is vested in the cows by nature, and the ghrta which is offered into the fire and through the fire into the rays of the sun, that is your share. Come and join. O honey sweet conductors and sustainersof yajna, holy managers and sustainers of the Rashtra yajna, taste, protect and promote the burning fi re and ri si ng fragrance of yajna and raise it to the lights of heaven. 
1850 :Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn, men and women of the Rashtra, may the rising warmth and fragrance of yajna reach you. May the self-sacrificing organising priest of the yajna of love and non-violence, bearing milk and ghrta, conduct the yajna for you. Ashvins, enjoy the milk of cows, warmth of sun rays and the milky sweet knowledge of the honey essences of nature and protect and promote the yajna. 
1851 :Come fast, O milk man, with milk and ghrta and offer the shining oblation of cow's milk into the yajna fire. Adorable Savita, self-refulgent sun, has illuminated the heavens and in pursuit of the dawn shines bright over the earth. 
1852 :I invoke the holy cow of Madhu-vidya, knowledge of the honey sweets of divine Nature. Let the man of expert hand and intelligence distil the honey sweets. May Savita, highest lord giver of light and life, light up the holy fire for us, and may the fire of this explorative yajna reveal the secret of M adhu vidya for us. 
1853 :Madhu-vidya, mother guardian and promoter of the prosperity, honour and excellence of the noblest gracious powers of the world, loving from the depth of her heart like the lowing mother cow for her calf, is come. Let this mother sustain the milk of life for the Ashvins, men and women of the world, and let her also grow and prosper for the honour and excellence of the world. 
1854 :Agni, ruler, leader, sagely scholar, giver of light and life, self-controlled friend of the home and family, vibrant and dynamic, invoked, invited and loved in the home, come and grace this yajna of ours, having overcome and crossed over all fighting forces of our enemies, and bear and bring the sweetest nutriments of life for us. 
1855 :O mighty Agni, light of life, great and highest are your gifts of wealth, honour and splendour. May they be good and auspicious for our great good fortune. Bless usthatourfamilial loyalty and discipline be good, divinely controlled and directed, and let the powers of our negative forces be kept down, ineffectualised. 
1856 :O Spirit of the nation, children of the earth, inviolate and inviolable as the holy cow, be great and glorious by virtue of pure barley food, and then all of us would be great and glorious. Eat pure herbal food, drink pure water, and live a simple life of purity, kindness and universal giving. 
1857 :The cause of red excrescences such as pustules and inflammations is black, some negativity in the system, this we have heard. All such I pierce and cure with the root of divine curative M uni's root. 
1858 :(Satavalekara says that M uni is the name of herbs such as "Damanaka, Baka, Palasha, Priyala and M adana.) I pierce the first of them, I pierce the midmost, and I pierce this vilest of them and clear them out like a knot of hair. 
1859 :With words well chosen and chiselled, I cure your jealousy, and, O master, the anger that distresses you, we pacify. 
1860 :O master of the vows of self-discipline, keep to the vows of your discipline, always be good and happy at heart, and shine here in life. O J ataveda, light of life and life of the fire of yajna, lighted at heart and in the vedi of yajna, we pray, let us abide by you in the discipline of life, be blest with noble progeny and live happy at heart, one and all. 
1861 :(In this Sukta it is clearly shown that physical excrescences are not only physical, they are also related to states of mind, mental excrescences such as jealousy, hate and anger. The cure of ailments has to be not only physical but also mental. The mind must be at peace. There should be no blind spots, no communication gap, no cleverness and no pretence, and we must keep to our vows of disci pi ine like thefire of yajna and the universal jataveda.) (Inviolate, inviolable cows, children of the earth) blest with noble progeny, roaming around and browsing on lush green fields and pastures, drinking pure water in clear pools and lakes, let no thief rule over you, no sinner, no contemner, and no strike of the violent to fall on you. 
1862 :K now the paths you move on and by, be there steadfast, be happy and rejoicing, be together united, have a reputable name in the world. O divine ones, come and be close to me with your noble attributes and strengthen and enrich us, this house, this hall with plenty, beauty and graces of life. 
1863 :Pustules more flowing than most, more painful than most, drier than most, more putrefying than with salt, O physician, cure. 
1864 :The pustules on the neck, or on the shoulders, on the arm pits, or the pustules on the groin or those with morbid flow, O physician, cure. 
1865 :The contagion caused by sexual contact which degenerates the ri bs or affects the sol es or which affects and persists on the head, all that, O physician, cure. 
1866 :The sexual contagion spreads like a flying bird and infects the man, and whether it is recent or chronic, O physician, the cure is there for both. 
1867 :O J ayanya, sexual contagion, we know the basic cause from which you arise and infect, where and how you can kill, and of that we provide the home cure. 
1868 :Bold and resolute Indra, virile and generous lover of life, drink thejoyous soma of life in the cup of good health. H eroic warrior, in the battle of life for the winning of wealth, honour and excellence, you are breaker of the clouds of darkness and dispeller of dust. Come, join the mid-day session of yajna and bring us showersofwealth.lndeed,youyourselfarethe treasure centre of wealth and excellence. Bring us the wealth of health, honour and excellence, and freedom from disease. 
1869 :(The real cure of disease is prevention, to be Indra, potent virile by Brahmacharya upto twenty- five years, sexual disci pi i ne w ith continence as a married man and abstinence in old age.) Austere but burning and blazing as fire and sun, O Maruts, vibrant warriors, teachers and pioneers, dedicated to life unto death, destroyers of hate and violence, pray accept this homage for our protection against all negative forces without and within. 
1870 :W hoever the man full of hate and fury against us that wants to violate our heart and mind, culture and values, and wants to dislodge and destroy us, O M aruts, givers of settlement, peace and prosperity, with the power of your relentless discipline force him that he gives up his plans and snares, and with your passion for peace, eliminate the hater and the furious destroyer. 
1871 :M aruts, vibrant life time heroes of blazing radiance and arms of thunder, space unbound and countless forces, human at heart committed to humanity, may, we pray, release us from the snares of sin and evil. A ustere of disci pi i ne and joyous, they Iove to see peace and happiness prevailing all around. 
1872 :I release you from the cord of your physical bondage, I cut off the bonds of your mental fixations, and I strike off the bars of your spiritual illusion so that, eternal and immortal as you are, Agni, pure clairvoyant soul, you come and attain to your real nature here itself. 
1873 :Agni, enlightened soul, bearing as you do the powers and obligations of governance, defence and development for this social order, I join you, Agni, enlightened ruler, with the divine knowledge of Veda for the ruler. Shine, reveal and create for us the wealth, honour and excellence of a noble order and speak well of this social order among the divines as a pious order, grateful and generous giver of homage to the divinities of nature and humanity. 
1874 :O dark night of restand peace, integrative spirit of divine bliss, since by virtue of your greatness and grandeur, pious sages and brilliant people abiding together happily offer their part of homage to you in yajna, for that reason, O universal power of peace, harbi nger of good fortune, pray grace and fulfi I our yajna with success and bring us wealth, honour and excellence worthy of the brave. 
1875 :Truly I am A masvasya, all integrative power of Divinity. All people of noble action integrate and live in me. All divinities of nature and humanity, and both Sadhyas, men of accomplishment, and Indrajyeshthas, those with I ndra as their supreme, come and rest in me. 
1876 :A mavasya night is come, the confluence of all centres of rest, harbinger of energy, replenishment of health and wealth of peace and refreshing joy. We honour and adore A masvasya with homage of holy materials. May the night come with showers of energy and streams of life giving milk. 
1877 :O A mavasya, divine spirit of peace and total integration, universal shelter cover of love and union, none other than you creates and comprehends these world forms of life. We pray, may all that we love and desire with yajnic homage for fulfilment, be true and be accomplished, and may we be masters of wealth, honour and excellence. 
1878 :Full and perfect before, full and perfect after, full and perfect in the middle, the full moon night, all comprehensive sustaining spirit of Divinity, reigns supreme over all. Resting and abiding in peace and union with divinities and the greatness and grandeur of the light of perfection, may we, we pray, rejoice with food, energy and enlightenment on the heights of heaven. 
1879 :We honour, adore and join the virile, all conquering full moon of the night of light divine, spirit of the light of life. May the light divine give us unviolated, inviolableand imperishable wealth, honour O Prajapati, creator and sustainer of the life forms of existence, no one other than you, Lord Supreme, creates and comprehends all the forms of life in existence. We pray, may that we love and, for which we adore and worship you with yajna, be true and fulfilled. May we be masters of wealth, honour and excellence. 
1880 :Paurnamasi, full moon night, lightdivineof life, isthefirstandforemostadorableamong days and nights both dark and starry. Adorable Paurnamasi, divinity of life, those who love and worship you with yajnas and yajnic homage, they, holy of thought and action, enter and abide in the heaven of bliss. 
1881 :One after the other, two bright children play with wondrous energy going round the seas across space. One illuminates all regions of the universe, the other, you, O moon, keeping and displaying your time and seasons, are born anew every month. 
1882 :O sun, rising anew every day, you become young and ever fresh, flag symbol of the dawns and days, and ascend to the zenith. O moon when you rise you bear the divinities share of energy for them and bring long life for living beings. 
1883 :O Sun, O Moon, reflection of Soma, lord supreme creator and bliss of existence, O divine protector and promoter of the struggle of life, you are faultless, perfect and full for sure. O light all blissful, make me full and perfect, wanting in nothing. Bless me with wealth and progeny. 
1884 :O Moon, you are beautiful, beatific, perfect every way, in every part. I pray I too may be whole, perfect and full every way of life, with cows, horses, progeny, cattle, houses, wealth, honour and excellence. 
1885 :Whoever hates us, whoever we hate (is not full, not perfect, gravely wanting), him you help with prana and spiritual vision to fill up the void. May we all be full, perfect and fulfilled with cows, horses, progeny, cattle, homes and wealth. 
1886 :That immortal soma of bliss and holy energy which the divinities augment, and which unviolated soma the unviolated people share and internalise, by that energy and bliss, may Indra, the sun, Varuna, the moon, and Brhaspati, lord of expansive space and boundless knowledge, protectors and procreators of the universe, augment our life, with that may they bless us. 
1887 :O saints and scholars, honour and adore the sacred fire Agni and offer holy songs of praise to Agni, life and light of existence, for the wealth of lands, cows and sacred knowledge, and for success in the battles of life for progress, and by the power and grace of Agni, bring us noble wealth, honour and excellence. Raise this yajna of ours to the divinities of nature and let streams of ghrta and honey gifts of Agni flow on the earth. 
1888 :First of all, with strength, honour and lustre of mind, and excellence worthy of the order of the brave, I accept and internalise the presence of Agni, lord of light, and then I attain progeny, health and age, fire and passion of life and the sacred Word of the knowledge of Divinity. 
1889 :Agni, leading light and ruler of the world, bring in, rule over and sustain the wealth and values of life here itself. Let not miscreants with back-loads of mind and memory demoralise you to pull you down. Let every thing be good and smooth for you by the social order of the commonwealth, and may your friends and allies go on rising in strength and support for you, unopposed. 
1890 :Agni, cosmic spirit all pervasive, first presence self-manifestive omniscient of all forms, potential and actual, exists in advance of the dawns and days, and pervades the sun, the dawns, the radiating rays and the earth and heaven (as they come into existence). 
1891 :Agni, first presence self-manifestive omniscient of all forms, potential and actual, exists before and pervades and watches as they come into existence, every one of the dawns, every one of the days, and many ways extends and pervades every sun, the radiating rays and heaven and earth as they expand. 
1892 :Agni, let there beghrtafordivineyajnic service in the happy radiant hall and home. Let every man, brilliant and intelligent, light the fire in divine service, let our unfailing and divine daughters and grand daughters bring ghrta for service in yajna, and let cows yield abundant milk and ghrta in Agni-service. 
1893 :O Varuna, all ruling, all illuminating lord of justice and dispensation, your luminous presence together with justice is in the waters of space, atoms of Prakrti, and dynamics of nature, together with the karma of humanity. Thence may the ruler and dispenser of justice, Varuna, acquit and release us from all bonds of all places and forms. 
1894 :O Varuna, all ruling refulgent lord, release us from the bonds here, there and everywhere. As we say Varuna isApah, alwayswith us, inviolable, and the lord of our love and choice, so, O Varuna, destroyer of suffering, pray release us. 
1895 :O Varuna, lord of freedom and justice, loosen and untie our chains of bondage of the highest, medium and the lowest order and let them drop from us. And then O Aditya, lord of refulgent majesty, we all, free from sin and crime, dedicated to your law and discipline, shall be all for the service of mother Aditi, the lord's inviolable creation. 
1896 :O Varuna, release all chains of bondage from us, highest as well as lowest, all that have come by the laws of cosmic justice. Remove ail evil thoughts and dreams from us so that we may rise to the ultimate state of holiness and divine happiness in freedom. 
1897 :Agni, Jataveda, ail-knowing, all-aware, indomitable, immortal, refulgent ruler, protector and sustainer of the social order, shine here, removing all sin, evil, crime and disease, and protect and promote this homeland of ours with the dignity, virtues and values worthy of noble and peaceful humanity. 
1898 :you are born for great deeds and glory of the great dominion. Having removed the negative and hostile people, raise the dominion to a high state of excellence worthy of divinities. 
1899 :Like a terrible tiger roaming around atwill over the mountains, may the ruler come from farthest of the far distances. O mighty ruler, Indra, having sharpened the flaming arrow and blazing bolt, beat off the enemies and throw out the violent adversaries. 
1900 :For peace, progress and all round well being, we invoke and invite the heroic, divinely inspired and nobly acclaimed by enlightened people, patient yet irresistible challenger, victorious warrior of inviolable chariot, instant of action, unfailing conqueror of enemies in battle. 
1901 :From one challenging situation to another, I invoke and adore I ndra the saviour, I ndra the protector, I ndra the brave and adorable, and I ndra of noble deeds invoked by all. May I ndra, mighty glorious ruler, bless us with peace, progress and all round well being. 
1902 :That inspiring vitality of life which is in fire, which is in the waters, which inspires and pervades in herbs and trees, which pervades and informs all these worlds of the universe, to that Rudra-Agni, pranic life energy, light and warmth of life, homageand salutations! Get out and go, you are an enemy, surely you are an enemy. You have mixed and added poison into poison. It is now worse, the poison. Surely you have mixed, added and intensified the poison. Go back to the snake. Kill the snake. 
1903 :I have collected and honoured the nectar flow of life's action and experience and we mix and intensify it with the beauty and flavour of life's bliss. O Agni, leading light of life, sagely scholar, I come with the experience of life's fluidity of light and joy, pray refine and rarefy me with lustre and glory of life further. 
1904 :O leading light of life, Agni, sagely scholar, release mefrom limitations, re-create and refine me and join me with lustre and splendour of life, progeny, good health and full age. Letthedevas, nobilities, know the recreated and refined me, let Indra, the mighty and brilliant, know me, along with the seers and visionaries. 
1905 :O streams of water, dynamics of nature and mind, vibrant scholars and teachers of vision, flow on and wash away all that is dirt and despicable, all that is hate, jealousy and enmity, all that is false, all that is rabid execration. Wash me of that and consecrate. Sanctify me unto a new birth. 
1906 :O Samit, food of holy fire, you are the rising flame, the swell of the sea, raise me to the heights of prosperity. You are the light and splendour of the sun, lead me to the light, lustre and splendour of life. 
1907 :A s of old, cut down and root out the pride and spl endour of the viol ent I i ke the knot of a dried creeper, like a block in the way of progress. 
1908 :We freeze and confiscate the collected strength of money and materials of the destroyer by the order of the ruler. O violent saboteur and destroyer, by the law of social justice we eliminate the fire of your passion and power. 
1909 :The power and passion of the violent abuser, fear-monger and habitual tormentor, if expanded, must be cut down, if rising, must be brought down and negated, so that he is not able to move among men and women. 
1910 :Indra, the Ruler, should be nobly protective, innately powerful with means of defence and protection, compassionate and gracious, all-knowing and all-aware, he should stem out hate, jealousy and enmity, and provide fearless freedom for the people so that we may be happy masters and promoters of manly vigour and heroic deeds. 
1911 :Indra, the Ruler, should be highly protective, self-confident, and wholly ward off all elements of hate, jealousy and enmity far far away from us, so that we may, at peace, enjoy the good will of the adorable ruler and abide in his noble love and favour. 
1912 :With the power, force and high morale of Indra, ruler, commander and leader, let us too be conquerors of our fighting enemies, throwing out and destroying all surrounding forces of darkness, want and ignorance. 
1913 :With unshakable constancy of mind, love and loyalty, and with total yajnic homage of cooperation, we serve Soma, lord of peace and gracious ruler, so that Indra, master ruler and protector, may make the people free, self-governing and happy at heart. 
1914 :Of this human soul, two are vultures of the mind, both furious and sweetly tormenting, and they upsurge as if flying to the heights of heaven. Glowing and radiating, burning and parching, both afflict the heart and soul. They are love and infatuation, greed and anger.) Refer to Gita, 2, 62-63. 
1915 :I have settled these two like two cows resting in the stall, controlled them like two growling dogs, like two ferocious wolves. 
1916 :Both these are afflictive, constantly stinging, relentlessly piercing. Whoever the man or woman that bears this energy of love and passion, I control their passion to balance and bind them together to move on. 
1917 :The senses are quiet, withdrawn, ascowsresting in the stall, the bird of the mind has flown back home for rest, the clouds of imagination are back to rest in the mind, I have kept the two kidneys in proper place and function for eliminating the blocking and disturbing wastes and poisons of body chemistry. 
1918 :O high-priest of yajna, learned sage, expert in the science of yajna, as we have selected and appointed you in this on-going yajnic plan of social creation and production, come, eminent scholar, constant and firmly dedicated to the programme, take over this yajna, and create and enjoy the soma gifts of this performance. 
1919 :equipped with full powers in the social dynamics of progress, lead us on with all our mind, sense and will, with all noble and brave leaders, with the best of social interest and welfare, with sacred knowledge of universal val ue and al I that is in the interest of noble and generous people, and all that is good in the judgement and understanding of enlightened and adorable people dedicated to total good of humanity. 
1920 :O high priest of yajna, eminent and generous Agni, in this yajna hall of the assembly under your full control, inspire, lead and guide those creative and brilliant, passionately dedicated experts whom you have brought to join this programme. O Vasus, creators of wealth and knowledge for peace and progress, enjoying the honey sweets of food and drink provided for you, bear and bring valuable wealth of knowledge, power and materials for I ife's excel lence for this yajamana and this programme. 
1921 :O Devas, high priest and expert sages and scholars, who have come and joined this yajnic programme with love and favour to me, we have provided comfortable seats and homes of residence for you. Bearing, bringing and extending your own wealth, power and yajnic materials, create now the wealth of heat and light for humanity and rise to the heavenly heights of excellence and the joy of achievement. 
1922 :O holy man, go and join every yajnic programme of holy creativity and positive production. Socially adorable, go and join every organiser of yajna. This way you go and join and thence rise in your own essential nature and character, go to the root and rise to the top. This is the voice of truth in the essence. 
1923 :O yajnapati, host, organiser and president of the holy, creative, yajnic programme for the community, this yajna of yours which is performed with divine words and songs of adoration, is surely full of manly vigour and an act of adorable creativity. This is the voice of truth in thought, word and deed. 
1924 :The High priest's offer of homage with 'vashat' is to those who have been invited, and the homage with 'vashat' is also to those who have not been invited but are otherwise associated. O devas, divinities, sages, scholars, generous participants, knowing your holy ways and destinations, know the paths and reach your goals from here. 
1925 :O Lord of mind and thoughts and intentions, O Lord of cosmic mind, let this yajna of ours reach the divinities in heaven. Homage with the divine word of 'Svaha' to reach into the regions of the sun, homage with 'Svaha' to reach unto the earth, homage with 'Svaha' to reach into the middle regions of the skies, homage with 'Svaha' to reach unto the wind. 
1926 :Thus have we offered the homage of oblations to the divinities of nature and humanity. 
1927 :Let this oblation of homage, hallowed and intensified with fragrant inputs, with ghrta, with the electric energy of the waves of winds, with valuable refinements, with the winds, with the words and wishes of divine personalities, with the virtues of the divine forces of nature, reach unto the sky, the space, the sun and, ultimately, Indra, Lord Omnipotent. This is the word of truth in thought, word and deed. 
1928 :Cover the vedi with holy grass, lay it well and enclose it, do not disturb it, lying as it is in that quiet but dynamic state. Let the seat of the generous host be verdant, colourful and beautiful, not dull. These are golden measures of the beauty of the yajamana's home. 
1929 :off thoughts and dreams of want and misery. Within, I concentrate on B rahma, Vedic thought and presence of Divinity, and I keep off phantoms and illusions of suffering and sorrow. 
1930 :The delicacies of food I enjoy in dreams is nothing there in the morning, nor is all that seen in the day. May all this experience of illusion and reality, this knowledge, be good and auspicious for me. 
1931 :Having done homage to heaven and earth, and to the middle regions, and having acknowledged the fact of death as inevitable counterpart of life, now standing high, I watch the world and go forward. Let no powers of earthly nature hurt and violate me. 
1932 :Who would take us out of this despicable misery of jealousy and enmity and raise us higher? Answer: Kshatriya, the just and saviour warrior, who desires the happiness and noble wealth of life. Who is the lover of yajna? Who is the seeker and achiever of fulfilment? Who is the one that wins long life among the divines? Answer: Prajapati, saviour, protector and sustainer of the people, Kshatriya, the Ruler. 
1933 :Who in love and worshipful friendship with Brhaspati, Lord of unbounded space and boundless knowledge, to the best of his will and potentiality, sustains in body and eternal vitality the Rainbow Cow, versatile and universal Word of the Veda, ever abundant, ever fertile, given by Varuna, Lord of omniscience and cosmic wisdom, to Atharvan, the sage of stable mind established in Divinity? Answer: Kah, Prajapati, lord sustainer of the people, the Brahmana, sustainer of the wisdom and values of society. 
1934 :Off the mark of average humanity, opting for dedication to the Divine Word of the Veda, O man of sagely mind established in Varuna Brhaspati, hold on constantly to the wisdom, vision and noble values of holy life along with all your friends of like mind over the world. 
1935 :O jataveda Agni, omniscient Lord of wisdom, leading light of life, whatever in our life and conduct, we might do unconsciously in violation of the holy values of life by omission or by commission, pray save us from that, protect us against that, so it may be the divine gift of immortality for our good, for us and for our friends. 
1936 :Seven rays of the sun bring down the waters from space and the sky, and those showers of rain, O man, from the sky wash away your pain of want and famine. 
1937 :Whatever the force that wants to hurt and injure us, whether covertly or overtly, our own at close or far at distant, knowing us or not, O Agni, leading light, enlightened Ruler, letthetoothed weapon of punishment fall upon them. Let there be no place of rest for them, no survival, no successor. 
1938 :O J ataveda Agni, w hatever the force that assaults us, whether we are sleeping or awake, whether we are on the move or at rest, O J ataveda, with universal friend and ally mutually interested, counter and burn them out. 
1939 :Homage to this Agni, brilliant light of life, generous sustainer who controls all parts of the cosmic system in their respective orbits. With offers of ghrta in the yajnic fire, I serve the master sustainer and saviour who blesses us thus generously in such a beautiful world. 
1940 :O Agni, leading light of life, bring smoothness into the dynamics of life's progress, bring waters, living vitalities like pollen grains to the flowers. The Devas, divinities of nature and brilliant nobilities of humanity, rejoice, loving to give as well as take their share of the yajnic programme, both light and smoke, according to their place in Dharma. 
1941 :Dynamic forces of nature, sun-rays, pranic energies, communications of nature and humanity, and the mind, all rejoicing in the evolutionary vedi on earth, in heaven, and in the sun may, I pray, fill my hands with the ghrta I may offer in this cosmic yajna, and may they eliminate the clever, thievish, gambling rivals and adversaries from my life. 
1942 :Latest force with latest of universal knowledge to counter the adversary, O Agni, give us showers of ghrta to fight out the negationist's encounters. W hoever opposes us in our positive contributions to social and cosmic yajna, pray, destroy as lightning strikes down a tree. 
1943 :May Agni, who creates and gives us this wealth of lifefor our joy, who gives us the privilege and special merit i n rel ati on to the dynamics of I ife, accept this offer of homage with love so that we may enjoy and rejoice in life with the sustainers of the earth and her culture. 
1944 :O Vasus, 'sustainers of life on earth and elsewhere, happy and generous givers of wealth, honour and excellence', that's your name. Awful and daring in mien, brilliant and blazing in sight, be undoubtedly so in action and performance. O leaders of light, be sustainers of the social order in all fields of activity, thought and policy. May we serve you with our offers of homage with men and materials, and may we too be masters of wealth, honour and excellence. 
1945 :A s I, dedicated and prayerful, invoke and serve the divinities of nature and humanity, as we observe the discipline of Brahmacharya, service of the Lord Divine with study, austerity and continence, as I take over and perform the duties in the social dynamics of life, may all such powers and personalities I serve bless us generously with peace, progress and joy in such ways of the good life in such a beautiful world. 
1946 :Agni, leading light of life, and Indra, ruling power of life, destroy the darkness, want and suffering of I ife without any possi bi I ity of resistance i n the i nterest of the generous people of society. They are indeed, the greatest dispellers of darkness, they eliminate all ignorance, want and injustice. 
1947 :I invoke and call upon both Agni and Indra, both highest over and ahead of humanity, potent and generous, thunder-armed destroyers of darkness and negativity, who pervade all regions of the world and by virtue of whom men of yore won the paradisal bliss of life on earth. 
1948 :Indra, ruler of the world, divine Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, master of the boundless Word of knowledge, took you over by the yajnic ladle of oblation and sanctified you as dedicated to the fire of social discipline and governance of the order. Come, invited by our collective voice, and take over this dominion for this community of people, the yajamana of the soma yajna of the nation. 
1949 :O Vrshabha, omnipotent generator and energiser of existence, you are the seed and treasure-hold of I ndra, glory and majesty of the universe, sole reservoir of the soma joy of life, soul and power of the divinities such as sun and moon, and the innermost conscience and spirit of humanity, they are your children here on earth, and those that are elsewhere in other worlds, may they too, your own, be happy. 
1950 :Heaven and earth, both bright and beautiful, kind and close at heart, which use mighty observers of the laws of existence, and the seven streams of life which flow through pranas, senses and mind, and all through our actions, may all these keep us away and save us from sin and suffering. 
1951 :May they save us from the hurt and affliction caused by censure and imprecation, from ailments caused by water, from the snares of Varuna, lord of natural justice, from the fear of untimely death, and from offence and violence against natural forces of the world. 
1952 :(This mantra is more a prayer for immunity by observance of discipline than for cure of the consequences of a breach of the discipline, or, let us say, a prayer for both prevention and cure.) O Desire, O Desire for desire itself, loved and adored by victims of the love of greed, be uprooted and away, separate so that you become averted for the vigorous man of yoga in the state of renunciation. 
1953 :(R eference may be made to Taitti rya U pani shad, 1, 10: "A ham vrkshasya reriva, I cut off the root of D esi re and A ttachment," and to Y oga Sutras of Patanj al i, You are insatiable, rooted in desire unfathomable, poisonous, venomous to the state of total disjunction. Be uprooted upto the last fibre in the mind, totally overmastered by the vigorous person in pursuit of self-realisation. 
1954 :O Desire insatiable, attachment and greed, I take away your force and agitation from the mind and its f I uctuati ons and from the heart. I take away your fI utters of anxiety from over and around your complexion. Thus, I take away and subdue your entire force from the personality (and restore the mind and soul to peace). 
1955 :Let all disharmoney and disjunctions of body, mind and soul go off, all sorrow and suffering, curses and imprecations be out of the system. Let Agni, light of life, dispel self-consumptive and self-destructive tendencies. Let Soma, life of life, creative and inspiring spirit of Divinity, make up and replenish all injuries of mind and soul caused by violenttendenciesof the mind. 
1956 :Note: In this mantra, the word 'vyadhayah', plural form of'vyadhi', is the key to the sukta. Vyadhi is the opposite of 'samadhi'. Samadhi is the highest state of the mind and soul in harmony in meditation. In Yoga it means: Self-integration of the soul, Reintegration of the part with the whole, Reunion of the finite with the Infinite. It is a state of absolute harmony. Vyadhi is a state of total or partial disharmony. Hence mantra one is interpreted as an address to Desire insatiable, the root of disharmony, andthesecond asa prayer and resolution for harmony of body, mi nd and soul i n total personal ity- integration. 
1957 :Negative plenty, sinful prosperity, fall off far from here, out of sight hence, disappear, fall off farther than far, over there. We foist you, life's negativities, hate and enmities, with barbs of iron. 
1958 :and fal I en on me smothers me I i kea parasite creeper on a tree, I pray, O Savita, lord of life and generous of golden hands, take it away from us and dump it elsewhere, giving us, instead, plenty of peaceable settlement with positive wealth, honour and excellence. 
1959 :Hundreds are the genetic plenties and potentialities born along with the body of mortal man. Of these, the negative and sinful ones we throw out from life here. O Jataveda, lord all-knowing light of life, give us the positive, the auspicious, the gracious. 
1960 :These auspicious ones, and these other inauspicious ones of the plenties of life, I have distinguished and separated like cows sitting on the meadow. May the auspicious traits and potentialities grow joyous and prosperous, and those that are negative and sinful I have eliminated. 
1961 :'Homage' of proper herbal medication for fever with high temperature that gives burning pain, for sweating fever, for shaking fever, for delirious fever, for shivering fever, and for the relapsing fever, and let there be proper diet for the patient. 
1962 :'Homage' of proper herbal treatment for fever that comes after a day's interval, for fever that comes for two days, for fever that comes irregularly without regular interval, and for that which comes with fluctuation of time and temperature. 
1963 :charming peacock-haired horses. Let none whatsoever hold you back, let none catch you with snares like a bird. March on like an exceptional hero of the bow, advance and take the enemies on. 
1964 :N oble warrior, I cover your vital limbs with an armour. May Soma, lord of health and well being, wrap you round with immortal cover against death. May Varuna, lord supreme, vest you with honour greater than greatness itself. May all noble powers of the world bless you and celebrate you with joy, victorious one. 
1965 :Homage to the Immortal that rules the mortal in life and death. O man, let prana and apana energies abide here joyous strong for you in the body. Let this your spirit live on with pranic vitalities in this beautiful world of the Immortal and you enjoy your share of the life and refulgence of the sun. 
1966 :Bhaga, lord of immortal glory, takes care of this man. Soma, the moon, and A nshuman, the sun, take care of this man, and M aruts, winds and pranic energies, take care of him, and Indra, cosmic energy, and Agni, life's heat of vitality, take care of him for health and all round well being. 
1967 :H ere in body be your living vitality, here your pranic energies, here your health and age, here your mind, all abide in strength and joy. We all, gifts of the Immortal, with the Voice Divine, protect you from the snares of mortality and sustain you in the happy state. 
1968 :O man, rise up high from here, never move downwards. Rise, breaking yourself free from the fetters of death. N ever sever yourself from this beautiful world, Let the winds of cosmic energy blow for you. Let the rains bring you nectar showers of immortality, let the sun shine for the health and well being of your person, let death itself be kind and compassionate and spare you from violence and protect you. 
1969 :O man, up and onwards is your path in life, not downward. So for your life I give you the vigour and the art and expertise of living long and healthy. Come and ascend this chariot of immortal bliss, and as you grow in age and experience, speak of the knowledge of life for other's good. 
1970 :Your mind must not go counter to this path of progress onward, nor must it write itself off in despair, nor must you neglect other living beings out of pride and wantonness. Nor must you be merely servileto your parents and seniors, serve them by covering further distance in their line. And may the Vishvedevas, all divinities of nature, all nobilities of humanity and your own mind and senses support, protect and promote you to go fast forward. 
1971 :Wail not over those that are past and gone, they take you off and away from yourself. Rise above the darkness and oblivion, come into the light. We hold you up by both your hands, love and reinforce you with new zeal and enthusiasm. 
1972 :Let not the dark and the white watch-dogs, the lighted day and the dark night, sent by Yama, lord of mutability and passage of life, arrest you and your progress, they are both guardian path makers too. Come hither, this way to life. Look not, think not, wander not, this way and that around. And do not sit still, idle, absent minded. 
1973 :Do not follow upon this seductive path of Adharma. It is dangerous, unknown, you have not gone this way earlier. Of this I warn you, man, take not a single step on to it. It is far, unfathomable, fearful. This way hither on the path of Dharma, it is all fearless for you. 
1974 :Let the fire energies fluent in waters and in nature's waves of energy protect and promote you on the path of Dharma. Lettheyajnic fires which men light and feed protect and guide you on the way forward. Let Vaishvanara J ataveda, cosmic vitality and refulgent Divinity, guard and promote you. And may the heavenly sun along with the electric energy of lightning in the middle regions never hurt and burn you out of existence. 
1975 :May no flesh eating agent, natural or human, hurt and destroy you. Keep away from fatalities. May heaven protect you. May the earth protect you. May the sun and moon protect you. A nd may the middle region protect you from natural strike of calamity. 
1976 :experience both protect you. Let the wakeful and the steadfast guard you. Let the preserver, protector and the guardian save and protect you. 
1977 :Let them guard you. Let them protect you. Let them preserve you in character, safe and unassailed. For all of them salutations. To them all homage. 
1978 :For all living beings in this vast world of flux, may the winds, the clouds, sustaining nature and the Lord Divine, the inspiring sun, all protector Spirit of the universe help and maintain you at your best, may your strength and pranic energy never forsake you. We invoke and call upon you and your life's vitality. 
1979 :reach you. Let no darkness assail you. Let no rough word ever come and hurt you. How can you, a yajnic soul, be ever hurtful to any one? May theA dityas, Vasus, Indra and Agni bless you to fulfilment with plenty, prosperity and all round well being. 
1980 :May the heaven, earth, and Prajapati, lord sustainer and protector of living beings, take care of you and protect you. And may herbs and herbal medications with life-saving soma on top of them fulfil and exalt you over and above the fear of death. 
1981 :O devas, generous and brilliant powers of nature and humanity, let this man be and prosper here only among us. Lethim not go anywhereelse. Westrengthen him with a thousandfold energy and immunity against the fear of death. 
1982 :I have protected you against death. May the bearers of health and age together act, and nourish and exalt you. Let no mourners with hair dishevelled wail for you. Let no grief stricken sufferers wail for you. 
1983 :I have brought you back from the jaws of calamity. I have regained you. You have come back, renewed, refreshed. I have recovered you whole in body and health, all your eye sight, all your health and age in full I have recovered for you. 
1984 :Light is come back to you in all its variety. Darkness and delirium has gone off from you. Wethrow out untimely death, calamity and consumption faraway from you. 
1985 :O man live and enjoy this nectar stream of life which, I pray, may be inviolable till maturity to the full. I bring you again life's vitality of prana and full age of good health. Do not take to a life of dissolute pleasure, do not suffer the darkness of ignorance, and you must not die before the full span of hundred years of good health. 
1986 :Come up front and take on the life-light of living vibrantmen, I bring you a lifespan of full hundred years. Liberating you from the snares of death and dishonour, I bring you a long span of excellent good health. 
1987 :I have created your pranic energy of breath from the wind, the eye from the sun. And the mind that is yours, that I vest in you. Have and be yourself the whole personality with all limbs of the body system, speaking, self-expressive, articulating your words with thetongue. 
1988 :Like fire newly lit and raised, I vest you with life energy of prana, universal as the pranic energy of bipeds and quadrupeds. O Lord of life and death, I offer homage to you, homage to the light of life, homage to divine life energy. 
1989 :May thisman liveon, let him notdie. We revive him with pranic energy of breath. I prepare the medicine for him and administer the dose. O lord of life and death, pray subject him not to untimely death. 
1990 :To avert the danger and save the I if e of this man, I bring up and prepare the medicine which would revive his energy without hurting him, raise his vitality, enhance his resistance, protect him against deterioration, fight out the disease and restore him to normal health. 
1991 :O lord of life and death, pray speak the word of life, ensnare him not, revive and recreate him. He, being your own, devoted and prayerful, let him be here and live with full vigour and movement. O lord of life, destroyer of disease, be kind and gracious, give peace and health, avert the danger, give him life and good health. 
1992 :O lord of life and death, speak to this man the saviour's word of redemption, be kind and protect him, let him rise from this state of misery and moveoutwhole in good health all over the body, fully conscious, knowledgeable and respectable, and live a full age of hundred years, restored to fulI self independence to live and enjoy life freely on his own. 
1993 :Let the punitive strike of nature's forces spare you, I have immunised you against the negativities of mutability and metabolic change and thus I recover you from the stroke of untimely death. I have brought you far out of the flesh eating cancerous vitality of the system and thus draw the line of defence for your life and living against ill-health and disease. 
1994 :O Death, your path of change across the world of mutability is unconquerable, still, to protect this man against the accidents on that path onward to maturity, we armour him with B rahma, the knowledge of life and death to maintain good health with freedom from disease. 
1995 :O man, I strengthen your prana and apana energies and fortify your health for long lifeso thatyour life, all age and death in the natural course be good for your ultimate well being. Thus I ward off the pain of all the strokes of the agents of change sent by Yama, lord of the law of mutability, working through the march of time ordained by the sun. 
1996 :Adversity, calamity, seizure, cancer, consumption, contagion, and all that is evil and destructive, we ward off from afar and eliminate as we dispel the darkness from life. 
1997 :I ask of immortal, all knowing, all inspiring Agni, giver of life, to give you pranic energy of life so that you do not suffer ill health and disease, live immortal against untimely death and be dedicated to Divinity. This I do for you, and may this prosper for you. 
1998 :Sam te surya a tapatu sain vato vatu te hrde. Siva abhi ksarantu tvapo divycih payasvatih. 
1999 :May the earth and heaven, both unafflictiveand inoppressive, be kind and gracious to you. May the sun shine with peace and prosperity on you. May the winds blow for peace and pleasure of your heart. May the rain showers, divine and generous, bring you peace and plenty. 
2000 :May the herbs and trees and their gifts of medicine be good and kind to you. You know I have retrieved you from a low state of health to a higher level of life and health on earth. And there may the sun and moon, lights of divinity, protect and promote you. 
2001 :W hatever garment is your upper cover, and that which you wear for a waist bond, that we design and treatforyour comfort and well being for health, and let even that be not rough for the skin contact. 
2002 :O barber, as you shave the hair, beard and moustache with a sharp and clean razor, you should not hurt the person's health and hisfineandfaircomplexion. 
2003 :Let rice and barley be good and auspicious for you, nourishing, health giving, exhilarating, resistant to debilitating and consumptive conditions. They protect you against sickness, disease and cancerous ailments and save you from sin and anxiety. 
2004 :Whatever food, produced by agriculture, you eat, whatever milk or water you drink, all thatfood and drink old or new I render free from poison and toxins, for you. 
2005 :O man, we entrust you to the day for sun and activity, and to the night for rest and peace, to both we entrust you for balance of work and rest for recuperation. O day and night, pray save and protect this man of ours from sin and indigence and from ogres and destroyers. 
2006 :O man, for you we fix a hundred years, and ten thousand years, and, further, ten thousand multiplied by two, three and four, years of age. May Indra and Agni and all Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity, without hesitation and reservation be favourable and support you. 
2007 :(This is a metaphorical and highly mystical mantra which describes the age of the individual person and the age of humanity on earth. The age of the individual is one hundred years, while the age of humanity in each creation cycle isfour billion and three hundred and twenty million years.) Satavalekara explains the mantra in a simple manner: We fix a hundred year uninterrupted age for you. There are two yugas, sandhi transitions of morning and evening of the day, three seasons of winter, summer and rains, and four periods of life, Brahmacharya upto The mystical interpretation of the mantra is that the age of humanity is 4,32,00,00,00O (four billion and three hundred and twenty million) years divided over one thousand four-yuga divisions of 43,2000O years each (which is'niyuta', 10,000, multiplied by 432): For further details, reference may be made to K shema-karana D asa Trivedi's comment on this mantra in his translation of Atharva-Veda published by Sarvadeshika Arya Pratinidhi Sabha, Delhi. 
2008 :O man, we entrust you to the autumn, winter, spring and summer seasons and auspicious years when herbs and trees grow fresh and bloom luxuriantly. 
2009 :Death rules over the bipeds. Death rules over the quadrupeds. However, O man, fear not. We raise you above that fear of that Death, master ruler of life on earth. 
2010 :You, unviolated, unafraid, will notdie, you will not die. Do not fear. There in the state of knowledge, they do not die, nor do they go down to the state of darkness and oblivion. 
2011 :There where this Brahma, super soul, superconsciousness, this knowledge of the Supreme reality of life is made the line of all round defence for life, all remain alive, the cow, the man, the animal, all being the spirit, no one dies, no one is killed. 
2012 :May that line of divine defence all round protect you from the violence of your equals and adversaries. 
2013 :Immortal as you are, be not subject to death. Outlive even your life time, eternal and immortal as you are. Let not your pranas forsake your body before full time of your life on earth. 
2014 :Hundred and one are the ways and forms of death, pains and sufferings to be crossed over in the ordinary course of life. May the divinities of nature and the enlightened people, by thecosmic light of lifeabove them all save you from that kind of death. 
2015 :You are the embodiment of the fire of life. You are the saviour, destroyer of evils and adversaries. You are the destroyer of disease and distress. You are Putudru, the sanative, sanctifier by name. 
2016 :(This mantra is interpreted both as an address to a sanative and as a prayer to the divine spirit.) I light and with ghrta sprinkle and raise Agni, destroyer of evil, swift warrior and winner, friendly, known and effective far and wide, and thus I come to have peace and comfort in life. Lighted and raised with yajnic performances of creativity, may Agni protect us against dangers and violence day and night. 
2017 :(Agni may be interpreted as the physical fire of yajna, or as the social powers of law and order and defence, or as the light and fire of the spirit within, or as the divinity working through such natural forces as the sun and wind. Such powers fight against the pollution and negativities prevailing around and provide us with safety, peace and comfort. All these variations of 'Agni' ought to be kept 'burning' throughout with yajnic programmes of creative character at the natural, social and spiritual level with our individual and collective efforts.) O jataveda, all wise, all reaching Agni, leading light and ruler with jaws of steel and flames of fire, lighted and raised to full blaze, catch up violent and destructive forces and senseless elements with flames and, rising ever stronger, hold the flesh eaters and crush them all with your jaws of steel, i.e., relentless justice and unsparing punishment. 
2018 :Reaching and protecting both at hand and far off, destroyer of destroyers and sharp of understanding and intelligence as you are, keep watching and testing the honesty and integrity of your forces, lower as well as higher, those of internal law and order and those of external defence. Go upto the skies and with your unsparing forces catch and fix the elements of sabotage and destruction. 
2019 :O Agni, thunderous destroyer of evil and enmity, saboteurs and destroyers, let electric force and relentless strike break dow n the cover and camouf I age. O J ataveda, all-knowing all-reaching presence, break the interior connections of this organisation, and let the flesh consuming fire collect the body for itself. 
2020 :Now wherever O J ataveda Agni, you sight the soboteur destroyer, whether settled or moving on earth or flying in the sky, then immediately acting at the fastest, sharp and unsparing, fix him with the strike of an arrow or bullet. 
2021 :Agni, exhorting your forces with inspiring addresses, calibrating your arms and ammunition with collective action and strategic assemblies, shining and sharpening your missiles with electric force, strike at the heart of the violent and the destroyers, turn back their arms and break their striking force. 
2022 :Agni, J ataveda, those that have been seized and those that have surrendered and appeal, protect. But the destroyer, O scorching power, strike down without delay with the force of arms and let carnivorous birds and animals feed upon them. 
2023 :O youthful Agni, whosoever be the saboteur and destroyer that does this heinous deed of destruction, prod ai m right here that it i s he. Sei ze hi m w i th the search light, bring him up for scrutiny of the people's watch and punish him so that he is rendered ineffective. 
2024 :Agni, all aware, all watchful, refulgent guardian of the peopl e, with a sharp eye on al I powers and forces of the land, protect and promote this yajnic social order and take it forward for the people. Let not the evil, destructive forces and saboteurs, deceive, intimidate or demoralise you who, they should know, are destroyer of the destroyers. 
2025 :O watchful guardian of the people and the dominion, Agni, watch all round and sight out the evil and destructive elements from amongst the people. Then destroy three prime forces of theirs: Break their back with awful force and passion, eliminate their intelligence and forward planning, and uproot their roots in three ways: dig out the roots, dismantle their bases and roast out the future seeds. 
2026 :O Jataveda Agni, the destroyer who violates truth and law by untruth must suffer the chains of your law three ways: Arrest him, overwhelm him with the refulgence of truth, power and law, and face him with people that honour the order and value the truth of the order. 
2027 :The execrations which people in argument utter in their differences, the roughness of tone which fighters produce i n their quarrel, and the sting that is born of the mind in the pain of anger, with that pain of affliction, Agni, pierce the heart of the violent saboteurs and destroyers of life and truth. 
2028 :Agni, with the force and power of your law and discipline, destroy the violent evil doers wholly, with your power and passion destroy the demonic forces wholly, with your light of knowledge and wisdom eliminate the stupid and insensitive wholly, and destroy the flaming ogres who suck the life blood of others for their pleasure. Destroy all these wholly, beyond recovery. 
2029 :Let the brilliant wise eliminate the crooked, let the abuse and execration shot out by the evil revert to the evil, let the darts of lies cut the liar to the quick at heart, and let the evil destroyer suffer the enslavement and snares of the world. 
2030 :Who feeds himself on human flesh, on horse flesh, on any animal flesh, who feeds on cow's flesh and thus carries off the inviolable cow's milk for all time, O Agni, with your power and passion for truth and right, cut off the head of such persons. 
2031 :If the violent people bear off or pollute water meant for cows, the evi I doers must fal I for their offence to the cow. Let refulgent and noble Savita, the ruler, throw them out, and they mustforfeittheir share of herbs and greenery. 
2032 :All watchful guardian ruler of the people, let the violent evil doer not partake of the yearly milk of the ruddy cow, and whoever of them would fain taste of the milk, by your light and power pierce him to the quick of his heart. 
2033 :F or al I ti me, Agni, the spi ri ts of evi I, tormentors, and destroyers of life, have not been able to win over you in the battles of nature and humanity. You always destroy them. Pray burn the flesh eating demons along with their roots and seeds. Let none escape the onslaughts of your life saving divine power. 
2034 :Tv am no agne adharddudaktastvam pascaduta raksd purastat. Prati tye te ajardsastapisthd agha- samsam sosucato dahantu. 
2035 :Agni, fiery ruler and saviour, protect us from below, from above, from behind and from the front. Let those unaging flames of yours, burning, blazing and unsparing destroy the maligner and evil doer. 
2036 :Agni, ruling light of life, saveusall round,from behind, from the front, from below, from above. You are the poet creator, save us by the vision and Word of Vedic creation. You arethefriend, save us, your friends, you are unaging, save the aged and the aging, you are immortal, save us, the mortals. 
2037 :Agni, cast the same eye of scrutiny, discrimination and dispensation upon the vociferous adversary with which you watch and sight out the irreverent maligners and evil doers. Like a yogi established in perfect inviolable peace beyond all fluctuations, with the divine light and vision of clairvoyance, light out the thoughtless fool who clouds and violates the truth and law of eternal values. 
2038 :Agni, mighty leading light, sagely wise and visionary, day in and day out we think, meditate and establish you among ourselves as an all round bulwark of protection and fulfilment and an inviolable destroyer of demonic evil doers. 
2039 :Agni, with all round watchful presence and all time cleansing process against poisonous elements and antisocial forces, destroy the evil, the saboteurs and the demonic destroyers with blazing beams and flames of scorching fire. 
2040 :Agni, leading light and mighty ruler, shineswith boundless light and fire in all its glory and majesty, and with its light and power illuminates and reveals all power and potentials of the world of its creation. It challenges and defeats the ugly and evil forces of the negative elements of the world and constantly sharpens and shines its fighting gear for the elimination of destructive forces. 
2041 :O J ataveda, instant all knowing Agni, unaging, sharp and penetrative, deadly are your arms of offence and defence in battle, shined and calibrated by divine vision and knowledge. With those arms. O J ataveda, and with your light and fire, openly destroy the demonic ogres, evil, cruel at heart, destroyers of life who plan to enslave humanity. 
2042 :Agni challenges and destroys theevil destroyers. Agni, of purest powerful light and flame, is immortal. Agni is pure, purifying, adorable. 
2043 :Indra-Soma, O lord of power and justice, O master keeper of peace and harmony, subject the evil and wicked to the heat of discipline and correction, or punish them and reduce them to nullity. O generous and virile lord and ruler, let not the forces of darkness grow, keep them down, let not the misguided fools rise and spread out, shut them down and far off. Let the hoarders, grabbers, ogres and devourers be subjected to law and punishment, destroy the exploiters, stop them and let their fangs be blunted and rooted out. 
2044 :I ndra and Soma, lord of power, and lord of peace and harmony, let the sinner and the criminal, supporter and admirer of sin and crime along with the sin and crime, and the tormentor of the good and innocent go to thefire of discipline, punishment, or elimination like a handful of food meant for the fire. Never compromise with the enemy of nature, divinity, humanity and the wisdom of humanity, the cannibal and the carrion eater, the man of hate and evil eye, the sceptic, the cynic and the negationist. For them have the contempt they deserve, and either correct them or eliminate them. 
2045 :Indra and Soma, fix the evil doers and throw them into deep dungeon of darkness without remission so that no one of them may raise his head for evil doing. That power of yours full of patience, fortitude and courage, that righteous passion should be for the destruction of evil and sabotage agaist life and social harmony. 
2046 :Indra and Soma, from heaven and earth, from thunder and lightning and the showers of clouds, from the light of idealism, love and generosity and down-to- earth realism, bring unfailing laws of correction and punishment against sin and crime, bring acts and policies against poverty, disease, unemployment and wilful sloth, and against the supporters of sin and crime as well as against compromi sers w i th negati viti es and negati oni sts. Enact laws of incentive and encouragement for the generous, and blazing prohibitions for the adamant so that you nip and burn off rising crime and evil in the Indraand Soma, turn all round and revolve your search lights, ignite and shoot out from the skies your weapons of offence and defence, and, with fiery, thunder-tipped, fatally destructive, irresistible and inviolable arms, fix the voracious ogres, strike them on the precipice and throw them into the abyss, let them run off into silence and oblivion without uttering a sigh of pain or voice of protest. 
2047 :I ndra and Soma, leading powers of governance and peace, like mighty forces in harness ruling the nation, may this prayer of mine, which I address to you with the best of intention and understanding as an exhortation, inspire you and guide you all round, and may you, as the ruler and protector of the nation that you are, make these words of prayer, exhortation and adoration fruitful. 
2048 :And remember, be watchful and alert against the malignant, evil and treacherous forces, ward them off and eliminate them with the fastest interceptors and destroyers at the very onset. Indra and Soma, let there be no peace, nothing easy, for the evil doer who may any time try to inure, sabotage or enslave us out of jealousy and enmity. 
2049 :And while I live and act and behave with a mature mind of purity and truth, if someone malign me with false words, let him be caught up like water in the hand grip and evaporate in the heat, O lord Indra, ruler and law-giver of power, let him be reduced to nothing because he speaks nothing but falsehood. 
2050 :O Soma, lord of peace and justice, if there be those who, with smartness and fast actions, malign, locerate and deprive the man of purity, truth, honour and spotless reputation, orwith their powers and prestige denigrate the man of goodness and charitable disposition and bring disgrace upon him, deliver such men to the sufferance of darkness and remorse or let them suffer the pangs of deprivation themselves. 
2051 :O lord of light and vitality, Agni, whoever pollutes the flavour, taste and vitality of our food and injures and impairs the vigour and power of our horses, cows and our bodies, let such enemy, the thief, the robber, the saboteur, be reduced to nullity and himself suffer debility of body and even deprivation of future extension and progeny. 
2052 :O divinities of nature and humanity, may he, who wants to injure and destroy me in the day and in the night, stay far off in personal presence and also with the progeny of his evil tendencies, and may he even fall lower than all the three orders of earthly existence, i.e., lower than the good, the bad and the indifferent. May his honour and reputation dry up and evaporate to zero and let there be none to remember him on earth. 
2053 :Words of truth and words of untruth rival and contend with each other. Of these, the one that is true and to the extent that it is simple and natural, Soma, lord of peace, harmony and goodness, protects and preserves, the untrue, he destroys. This simple and straight natural knowledge, the lord reveals for the man who is keen to know the truth and reality of life. 
2054 :Soma, lord of peace and harmony, does not call forth the crooked to the distinction between truth and untruth. Nor does he impel and support the Kshatriya, ruler administrator, who parades his power and valour falsely. But he does destroy the evil and the wicked and also the one who speaks the untruth, and both thewicked and the liar end up in the bonds of Indra, dispenser of justice. 
2055 :Unless I am a worshipper of falsehood as my divine ideal or adore the lord and divinities falsely, deceiving them as if, why would you, J ataveda Agni, all knowing lord of light and truth, be angry with me? You would not be angry, because only the speakers of falsehood would suffer your wrath and punishment. 
2056 :If I were a demon on the move, or if I tormented any person in life, then let me suffer death right now today. But I am not, nor have I done so. Then let that person be deprived of all his ten faculties of sense and prana who falsely proclaims that I am a demonic tormentor of others. 
2057 :Whoever says that I am a devil even though I am not a devil, and whoever says that he is pure and innocent although he is a very devil, may Indra, lord of power and justice, punish such a person with his mighty thunderbolt, may such a falsifier fall to the abyss as the worst of all living beings. 
2058 :And she that goes about at night, hiding her person like a spirit of hate and violence, a she-owl as if, would fall into the bottomless deep of darkness. M en of judgement should condem the evil with strong words of disapproval. 
2059 :O M aruts, vibrant powers of vigilance, stay among the people, watch keenly for the forces of evil and violence there, grab them and crush them all, they that fly about like birds over the nights and cause disturbance and violence in the divine morning yajnas of love and non-violence. 
2060 :Indra, lord of power and justice, from the light of divinity and wisdom of the sages, bring up and strike the thunderbolt of justice and correction tempered and sharpened with soma for peace and progress. Sharpen and train them on the wicked, seize them from front and back, up and down, and crush them with the bolt. 
2061 :These and other miscreants with the mentality of street curs roam around, attack people and try to damage Indra, the ruler, who is otherwise indomitable. Indra then, commander of power and force, sharpens the thunderbolt for these crafty saboteurs on the prowl and strikes the fatal blow upon them. 
2062 :Indra is the lordly power that throws off the upcoming saboteurs who damage the inputs and infrastructure of yajnic development for the peace and progress of the human community. He is mighty powerful justlikewhattheaxeisforthewoods, breaking down the evil and wicked destroyers like pots of clay whenever they raise their head. 
2063 :Indra, refulgent and potent ruler of the world, crush the evil and the wicked like pieces of clay with a stone: the fiend in the garb of an owl, or an owlet, or a dog, or a wolf, or a hawk, or a vulture. They are covert, stealthy, clever, jealous and growling cruel destroyers, cunning and voracious. 
2064 :Let no wicked demonic forces harm and destroy us. Let the darkness of tormentors harming us either by joint force or by doubt and scepticism be off. May the earth protect us against earthly sin and crime. Let the sky protect us against dangers from above. 
2065 :Indra, punish and eliminate the man demon. Punish and eliminate the woman demon who destroys by deception and crafty design. Let the stranglers of life who play with life and death lose their own neck and let them never see the rising sun. 
2066 :I ndra and Soma, lord of power and governance, peace and justice, watch every thing that happens and enlighten us too. Shine, reveal and proclaim what is happening and warn us too. Keep awake and watchful and let us rise too into awakenment. Shoot the arrow upon the demonic destroyers, strike the thunderbolt upon the covert saboteurs. 
2067 :This Pratisara, jewel mark of distinction, is awarded to the brave, a decoration of the warrior that is valiant, conqueror of adversaries, eminent hero, all round protector and defender of the good and a symbol of peace, prosperity and all round well-being. 
2068 :This jew el distinction is a mark of the destroyer of enemies, noble warrior among the brave, mighty powerful, vi ctori ous, bri 11 i ant bl azi ng, the hero that goes forward destroying the violent evil doers. 
2069 :By virtue of this exceptional honour and valour of divine order, Indra, ruler of the world, all-wise visionary, destroys the evil and dark forces of the world, subdues the negative forces of I ife. B y this he rules over both heaven and earth, and by this he controls all the four directions of space. 
2070 :This jewel distinction is a mark of dynamic progress in all directions, it turns off adversaries, it is a valorous destroyer of enemies. All controller, may the hero protect us all round. 
2071 :This is what Agni, the leading light says. This iswhatSoma, the sage of peace, Brhaspati, the eminent scholar, Savita, the inspiring spirit, and Indra, the mighty ruler, all say. May all Devas, brilliant leaders and sages of the nation, leading lights of life, turn off the onslaughts of violence against life and humanity by the noble force of distinguished heroes. 
2072 :I hold within me the light of heaven and the patience and stability of the earth, the light of the day and blazing radiance of the sun by virtue of the distinguished heroes of the nation. May the Devas, leading lights and guardians of the nation, turn off the onslaughts of violence against life and humanity by the noble force of distinguished heroes. 
2073 :Those people who wear the corslet of the jewel of distinctive strength and courage, rise high as if to the light of the sun. Such a person, self-controlled and all controlling, repulses the onslaughts of violence against himself and the nation. 
2074 :By the jew el distinction of strength and courage, and the radiance of moral and spiritual integrity, as if with all the seers and sages, I win against all negative forces and destroy the evil forces of violence against life and humanity. 
2075 :W hatever viol ences there be w hether i n relation to parts of the body, both individual and social, or in relation to pranic energy, both individual and social, whether caused by one's own self or by contact with others, may both these, navigable all, go far beyond the ninety streams of life, that is, beyond the three high, medium and low grades of intensity of the ten senses of perception and volition. 
2076 :This jewel armour of strength and courage, moral and spiritual integrity, both individual and social, may the Divinities, Indra, lord omnipotent, Vishnu, lord omnipresent, Savita, lord creator and inspirer, Rudra, lord of love and justice and dispensation, Agni, lord of light and leadership, Prajapati, lord protector and sustainer of created beings, Parameshthi, lord supreme, Virat, cosmic spirit of the universe, Vaishvanara, lord of humanity, and all saints, seers and sages award to this heroic soul. 
2077 :O heroic wearer of the distinction of eminence among people, you are the best, like the hottest of cleansers, bull among the animals, tiger among the terribles. In you we have got what we had desired, the ultimate at the closest in society. 
2078 :The man who wears this jewel of distinction is a very tiger, lion indeed, generous as the virile bull who destroys the adversaries that dare to challenge us. 
2079 :Lightnings of the sky smite him not, rulers of the earth and the highest of mortals challenge him not, indeed the wearer of this eminence shines unique over all quarters of the earth. 
2080 :Distinction of eminence, warrior wearer of the distinction, Kashyapa, lord of universal vision, created you, Kashyapa, lord of imagination inspired you. Fearless Indra, world ruler, bore you for humanity and thereby wins the battles of humanity against inhuman challenges. Indeed the divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity have made this distinction of a hundred virile powers as the protective armour of life and humanity. 
2081 :Indra, ruler, leader and warrior of heroic distinction, whoever challenges and wants to violate you with destructive acts, or with whatever best commitments he has, or with whatever cooperative forces he can collect, face him straight and, with the hundred power thunderbolt of punishment, destroy him. 
2082 :This eminent hero of jewel distinction, dynamic in all directions, mighty powerful, all victorious, all protective and harbinger of good fortune may, we pray, protect and promote the wealth and people of the earth. 
2083 :Indra, ruler of the world, brave invincible warrior of eminence, give us the I ight and freedom from enemies from below, giveusthelightand freedom from enemies from above, giveusthelightand freedom from enemies from behind, and giveusthelightand freedom from enemies from the front. 
2084 :May the heaven and earth bear and bring me the armour of defence, may the sun and day bear and bring me the armour of defence, may Indra and Agni, cosmic energy and earthly fire bear and bring me the armour of defence, and may Dhata, lord sustainer of the universe bear the defence and bless mewith all round safety and peace against all sin and violence, external and internal. 
2085 :May the lustrous versatile armour of defence, protection and peace at heart granted to me by Indra and Agni, lord omnipotent and leading light of life, which all the powers of nature and humanity would not violate, protect me whole in body, mind and spirit so that I may live and enjoy a long life of good health and enlightenment without inhibition or suppression and violence till the completion of my earthly existence to the full. 
2086 :May the divine armour of defence stay on me all round as a high bulwark of protection against violence. Come friends, join together under the umbrella protection of this invincible tri pie armour of defence of body, mind and soul collectively for the glory and fulfilment of our human destiny. 
2087 :Into this triple armour of wholeness of body, mind and soul, individual as well as collenctive, may Indra, lord omnipotent, vest full power and potential for human fulfilment. Come brilliant friends, all dear to divinity, join under the protective umbrella of this divine armour so that every one in humanity should be able to live a long life of health and happiness for a hundred years till the completion of his span of earthly existence. 
2088 :O humanity on earth, may Indra, lord giver of all round well being, protector of the people, destroyer of the demons of darkness, eliminator of the violent, all controller, all victorious, never defeated, lover of soma peace and joy of life, giver of freedom from fear and oppressi on, vi ri Ie and generous, bless you w ith the jewel of triple armour for inviolable peace, protection and happiness. May he protect you all round, day and night, always, all time. 
2089 :O woman, in your breasts which at your birth your mother washed, rubbed and cleansed, there must not be any negative elements such as germs and bacteria which may damage your vitality and harm the foetus. 
2090 :There must not be any ailment which stops the growth and formation of tissues, which is painful, which damages the tissues, which vitiates the growth and sensitivity of the foetus, which gives you a burning discomfort or damages your health and beauty, or gives neck or eye trouble. (All these ailments we must cure through pre-natal care.) The ailment must not persist, must not recur, must not affect the thighs and the groin. I prepare and administer a powerful remedy which would eliminate the painful trouble. 
2091 :Negative and positive conditions of health and growth contend together. Of these, the negatives we remove so that the positives may help the procreative power of the mother's system. 
2092 :The dark malignity, painful and debilitating, which affects the lower waist and the navel, such negativities we remove and root out from the ovaries and the womb of the woman. 
2093 :Yellow 'baja' counters and destroys all those germs and infections which affect through smelling, touching, licking, and which infect the flesh, strike deep and doggedly persist and continue to afflict. 
2094 :W hoever in the dream state disturbs and violates you in the garb of a brother or a father figure, let 'baja' ward off such surreptitious foolish presencesfrom your mind. 
2095 :(The i dea i s that the expectant mother i s a sacred presence to nature, to society, and even to her own self, because she is a human embodiment of mother nature herself and the sanctity of the mother must be protected, it must not be desecrated even in dream. And 'baja', a herb as well as a seed is an antidote for such mental disturbance.) W hoever surreptitiously approaches you while you are sleeping or when you are awake and intends to hurt and injure you or to deceive or destroy you, let your man ward off like the sun on the move dispelling the shades of darkness. 
2096 :Whatever the cause that kills the foetus and renders this woman a bereaved mother, O Oshadhi, life saving herb, O man blest with sunny radiance, destroy that cause which deprives the woman of her cherished love and desire for motherhood. 
2097 :Those that fly and dance around homes, humming and buzzing, those that stick, have bacterial sheaths, are crooked, annoying, creeping, O Oshadhi, destroy all these poisonous ones with fumes and smell. 
2098 :Those that buzz, gleam, bite through, destroy, have dangerous habits, fly round thickets and produce annoying noise, all these dancing like mad, we destroy from here and around. 
2099 :Those that cannot survive in the light of the sun shining from yon heaven above, those destructive germs and parasites of sheep skin, awfully smelling, bloodmouthed, those germs and insects we destroy. 
2100 :Those which, excessive in body even for themselves, holding that excess, abide and rise to the loins and waist part of women's body, these attackers of the womb and foetus of women, O eminent physician, Indra, destroy. 
2101 :Those which, of many colours, abide in the kitchen and in clumps of grass or flowers and produce flashes of light, and bearing their sting in front reach and vex married women, we destroy and eliminatefrom here. 
2102 :Those whose forefeet are back and heels are front, whose mouth is first in front, which are born on the thrashing floor, which are born from the smell of dung, which live in clusters, which are very painful, whose generative glands are large and which move very fast, these, O physician of high knowledge, destroy as soon as you discover. 
2103 :All round watchers, moving around for prey, mere males who value no culture of manners should not be allowed to mix with women. O man of correct social manners, stop the man without wife who tries to mix with this woman dedicated to her husband. 
2104 :Control and check the movement of the pretender, long haired thug of piety, the violent, the fondler, the loiterer, the trouble maker, the saboteur, and the boaster, throw them off their track as a restive cow kicks off the milkman's pot of milk. 
2105 :Expectant mother, whatever touches and violates your foetus, or whatever destroys your new born baby, let Pinga, the man of strength, or Pinga, the strong herb, wielding a powerful bow, pierce through the heart. 
2106 :The violent killers that destroy the new borns, or pollute the maternity home or the woman's generative system, let Pinga drive away such pollutants like the wind driving away the clouds. 
2107 :Let the woman hold the seed planted in the womb. Let not the foetus, secured and held, be not dislodged and miscarried. O expectant mother, let two powerful herbs, Baja and Pinga, worn by the girdle zone protect your foetus till maturity. 
2108 :protect you and the foetus from penetrative attacks of fast moving germs, nightmares, thoughts of wantonness and stingy meanness for the sake of the husband and the progeny. 
2109 :O physician, protect the mother and the foetus from double-mouthed, four eyed, fivefooted, fingerless germs creeping from leaves and creepers in curved motion. 
2110 :O physician, protect the mother and foetus from those germs that consume raw, liveordead human flesh. We destroy all the germs which thrive in water, air and the body and consume the foetuses. 
2111 :Let Baja and Pinga pierce through the heart of those germs which creep away from sun light like the daughter-in-law slipping away from the presence of the father-in-law. 
2112 :Let Pinga protect the life of new born male or female baby. Destroyers of the egg must not damage the foetuses. O physician, drive away the life destroyers from here. 
2113 :q i d'ci ^ q i $O d'q m q i'd d 4 i ^aTTfefcr qftf -tper tttt ii ^ n O man, let childlessness, child mortality, mourning and wailing, sin and suffering, be given up as objects of no-love like leaves fallen off from the branch of a tree. 
2114 :We adjudge and well approve sanative herbs which are brown, white, red, various and fine, dusky, and dark. They are nourishing, energising, rejuvenating, soothi ng, w i thout negative si de effects and attracti ve.A 11 these we recommend. 
2115 :May these herbs save this man, this patient, this humanity, from debilitating and consumptive diseases caused by the course of nature. The father of these herbs is the sun in heaven, their mother is the earth, and the seed and root of these herbs is the ocean-1 ike space and recuperative natural energy therein. 
2116 :A pah, waters and fluent energies of natural recuperation, are the first and best, and then there are the divine herbs which, from every part of your body, remove the consumptive disease caused by violation of the discipline of nature. 
2117 :Prastrnati of thick leaves and growth, Stambini of thick clusters, Ekashunga of single leafy growth, P ratanvati of I uxuri ant spread out growth, these herbs I take up and value. For you, I also invoke and take up Anshumati of many filaments, Kandini of reed-like growth, Vishakha of many extensive branches. All of them are of universal efficacy, powerful and life-giving for humanity. 
2118 :O powerful and victorious herbs, whatever the power, vigour and potency that's yours, with that, pray, cure this patient of this consumptive ailment. A nd here I administer the medication. 
2119 :H ere for the recovery and freedom of this patient from disease, I invoke and administer the living, animating, lifegiving, elevating, bloomingj ivantu herb of honeyed efficacy which will never harm him, never obstruct him, but will ever energise him to go forward. 
2120 :By my word of knowledge and prescription let vigorous sanatives come here so that we may take this patient, through treatment, beyond the crisis. 
2121 :Flames of fire, essences of liquid energies of nature, growing ever anew, more and more powerful, constantly strong in power of a thousandfold efficacy, known as such by name let these herbs and sanatives be brought here for the patient. 
2122 :Coated wi th A vaka pi ant j uice against i nfecti on, grown in waters, sharp in catalytic action, let these medications fight out the evil of disease. 
2123 :Let those herbs and medicines be brought here which free the patient from blood infections caused by violations of nature's discipline, and, sharp in action, eliminate toxins and poisons, destroy phlegm and root out the bacteria of consumption. 
2124 :Let herbs and plants, purchased, raised in power and reinforced, properly assessed, adjudged and defined, protect the peopl e, cow s and other ani mal s i n the vi 11 age. 
2125 :Honey sweet is the root of these herbs and plants, honeyed their germination, honeyed their middle part, honeyed their leaf, honeyed the flower. Soaked in honey, nectar their food and nectar they as food, may they give us nutriments for life, cow's milk first and A s many as they may be, as many as they are on earth, may these herbs and plants, thousand-leaved and flowered, free us from sin and evil and the pain of death. 
2126 :Of tiger-force is the value and efficacy of herbs and plants, they save us from ill-health, sufferance and ignominy. May these ward off, throw far out from us, all diseases and destructive negativities. 
2127 :A s deer from the lion's roar and cold from the heat of fire, so do ailments run off from the force of herbs and medications when they are brought for the sick and suffering. Let the consumptive and cancerous diseases of cows and people go away by herbal medications beyond the navigable streams around. 
2128 :May herbs and plants, saviours of life and protectors from disease, receiving their life energy from cosmic light and warmth, giver of living vitality for humanity, grow and spread out all over the earth. Chief of them is Soma, supreme, and their ruler is Vanaspati, the Sun, light of life. 
2129 :Herbs and plants which inspire us with pranic energy for the spirit throughout the body system grow on mountains as well as over the plains. May they, full of the milky food of life, be good and energising for the health and peace of our mind and heart. 
2130 :which are yet unknown: in all of them, we know, the food of life is full, collected and concentrated from nature. 
2131 :May all these herbs and medications together, without exception or exclusion or negation, know and act according to my word of healing so that we may take this patient across and out of the crisis of his life- threatening disease. 
2132 :A shvattha, the peepal, D arbha, the durva grass, Soma, the chief of herbs and plants, the nectar of pure water, and pure food which is like the pure offering for the holy fire, natural rice and barley, both sanative gifts of heavenly light which save life from the pain of death and hunger, all these are the food of life. 
2133 :O herbs and plants, colourful children of mother earth, when the cloud thunders and roars and showers you with living vitality, you spring to new lifeand grow. 
2134 :We give to this man, this patient, the immortal drink of the nectar power of showers and herbs, and that's how I do the curative treatment so that he may live the full hundred years of his life. 
2135 :The wild boar knows the herb, the mongoose knows the medicinal herb for itself. Of these, what the snakes and other wild creatures of the earth, know, I invoke and administer for the cure of this patient. 
2136 :The life-giving herbs which the eagle knows and recognises, the divine herbs which the sparrows know and recognise, those that the swans, other such and all birds know and recognise, and those which the deer know and recognise, all those herbs I take up and administer for the cure of this patient. 
2137 :A s many herbs as inviolable cows eat, as many as sheep and goats eat, those many herbs, selected and collected for you, O man, may give you good health, peace and comfort at heart. 
2138 :O man, O patient, as many herbs as people in general know, the medicinal herbs which physicians know, all those medicinal herbs of the world I collect and bring for you. 
2139 :May all herbs, plants and trees with flowers, buds and tender I eaves, fruits and w i thout fruit, together like mothers for the child give the milk of life for the I have redeemed you from the onslaughts of the five, i.e., from disturbance of the balance of five elements in the body system. I have delivered you from the onslaughts of ten, i .e., from di sturbance of ten senses and ten pranas in the system. I have saved you from the fetters of Yama, i.e., the pain of death. I have strengthened your body and mind so as not to commit violations of thedisciplineof nature by habitand action in behaviour. 
2140 :May Indra, shaker and breaker of the strongholds of enemies, heroic brave performer of noble deeds, shake up the plans and designs of adversaries so that we may fight out and destroy the forces of negativities a thousand ways. 
2141 :Let the successive boom of fire burning in acrid flames of pungeant fumes strike that enemy force with terror, so that when the adversaries see the fire and smoke from far they are struck at heart with fear and swoon in the terror. 
2142 :Ashvattha, O warrior on the fastest move, break those enemies to pieces. O destroyer, destroy them without a moment's delay, tear them into bits like shreds of hemp. Let the killer troops destroy them with fatal stri kes. 
2143 :Let the tough commander order his tough and determined troops to take hold of the enemies. Let the killer force with fatal weapons destroy those who do not surrender. Let the force of those surrounded and caught up be broken like reeds at once. 
2144 :The sky is the limit for the tactical net against the enemy, the vast quarters of space, the sustainers of the net. Having caught up the enemies by that net let mighty Indra, ruler and commander of high action, destroy the force of the destroyers. 
2145 :Vast indeed is the tactical net of great Indra, mighty of action and tempestuous of speed. By that net, O Indra, pounce upon all the enemies so that none of the enemies may escape the arrest and punishment. 
2146 :Heroic Indra of vast presence and hundredfold powers, worshipped by countless admirers, boundless H aving caught the destructive elements by that net, the hero of mighty deeds destroys a hundred, thousand, ten thousand, a hundred million of the destroyers with his force. 
2147 :This great world is the power net of mighty I ndra, greater than the great. 
2148 :By that Indra-net of boundless reach, I hold all those enemies with the dark cover of vision, mind and senses. 
2149 :Terrible disaster, despicable failure and poverty, unbearable sufferance, awful labour, lassitude, confusion: with these I hold all the adverse negative forces. 
2150 :All those negationists and negative doers I assign to death, those that are caught up in the deadly snare. B ound as they are, I take them on to the agents of death who kill by the cause of sin and evil. 
2151 :O agents of death, agents of the laws of dispensation, bind them up, hold and take them on to j udgement, I et thousands be ki 11 ed, I et the I aw s of natural justice crush them. 
2152 :Sadhyas, men of exceptional order of merit, uphold one column of the power and justice of Indra's system of governance and move on with their lustre and brilliance as part of the system. Rudras, scholars and sages of the middle order, uphold another column, Vasus, sages and scholars of the average order, uphold yet another column, and A dityas, sages and scholars of the highest order uphold the fourth column and move Vishvedevas, all nobilities of the nation who love freedom and justice should go on subduing lawless forces with their light of wisdom and irresistible expertise from above.Angiras, men of vibrant fiery force and power should fight at the middle level, destroying powerful forces of negativity and enmity. 
2153 :I love and develop herbs, plants, trees and their products, fruits and vegetables, all bipeds and all quadrupeds so that I may win over or destroy the enemy forces. 
2154 :I love, develop and employ all those that serve and sustain the fertility of the earth, all streams and rivers, all that creep and move, divine generosities of nature and humanity, all charitable people and seniors, in short all that is seen and unseen assets and powers of the nation, so that I may destroy the negative and destructive forces. 
2155 :The seeds and snares of death are sown and scattered a thousand ways which, if you step on and that way try to cross over, you would never be free. M an should launch the attack on the centrehold of the force of death the same way as they are scattered and be free. 
2156 :Gharma, passionate soul in the process of self- sacrifice in search of immortality, lighted up with the fire of divine love, is ripe for the offer with thousandfold power to win over death. O Bhava, love of life now fulfilled, and O Sharva, conqueror of death through life, both together holding the earth of colourful beauty on the palm, strike at the centrehold of death and destroy its thousandfold forces. 
2157 :Let the forces of death themselves suffer hunger, debility, fear and death. Thus let the weapons of death return unto the heat of death. O soul, Indra, O Sharva, conqueror of death, with attack on the centrehoid and thence control over the snares, destroy the force of death. (Thus let death itself die). 
2158 :O deadly enemy forces, fly back defeated, repulsed and terror struck by divinity. O Indra, O Sharva, let none of them, overthrown by Brhaspati, the soul of vision and wisdom, go free. 
2159 :Let their weapons fall down. Let them not be able to rearm themselves. Let the arrows, in that state of terror, fix them in the vitals of their body. 
2160 :Let heaven and earth together I ament over their death. Let the sky with natural forces lament over their fall. Let them never regain knowledgeable friends, no power, no prestige again. Instead, let them, fighting within themselves, condemn themselves to death. 
2161 :(This universe is the chariot of Indra, Lord Supreme.) The directions of space are the four horses of the chariot. Their balanced speed of motion transforms the natural materials into food for the yajna of evolution, the result being the spirit, enthusiasm, action and excellence of humanity, the space marks the height of the chariot, heaven and earth are the sides, the seasons are the rei ns, i nterdi recti ons are the guards, and Vak, Word of the Veda, is the bond of the wheels of motion. (Chariot in terms of space.) (This universe is the chariot of I ndra in terms of time.) The year is the chariot in motion. Parivatsara, the year that is complete i s the rear of the chariot. C osmic Time, Virat, is the ruler. The fire of life is the front and motive force of time and sustainer of life in the chariot. I ndra, the sun, sits left, and the moon is the driver, sits on the right. 
2162 :Hence victory. Hence complete victory. Hence all timevictory. Honour and all praise for victory. (Ride this chariot and win.) Those that ride the chariot would win. Those that don't, won't. Hail and honour to these! Shame for them who lose. Having beaten the enemies black and blue, I squeezethem to naught and relinquish the bow. 
2163 :Whence do those two arise: Purushaand Prakrti, man and woman, Prana and Rayi, Agni and Soma, Sun and Moon? From which world of mystery? From which highest universe of what existence? A nd what was that Supreme Superabundant, Eternal, Infinite Source? The two evolutes, Rtam and Satyam, that arose from that ocean of mystery, of those I ask you, O M aster, I ask by whom was the Eternal M other Cow (Prakrti) milked so that the two emerged? The One that rested in his own Infinity in the absolute state, with his own power, called up and stirred the ocean of Prakrti to activity, converting it to three- dimensional universal M otherhood stateof Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, i.e., thought, energy and matter, himself pervading it. That same self evolute of the potential Absolute, objective correlative of creative desire, that mysterious One, creates universal forms in thought and materialises them through Prakrti. 
2164 :The three, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, expand. Of them, the fourth, the Immanent Supreme Divine Self, articulates and objectifies as the Vedic speech of universality. Only the sage, highly intellectual and enlightened, would realise It, the Divine Presence, with the austere discipline of Tapas. Into that One Divine Presence, the one, human soul, is joined in yoga, into that One, the one soul experiences the communion in samadhi and in the state of absolute freedom and bliss. 
2165 :Five basic elements, i.e., Akasha, Vayu, Agni, A pah, Prthivi, are evolved from Brhat, the great sixth, ahankara, from which they evolve and into which they devolve. That great sixth is evolved from the great Brhati, M ahat. Whence is Brhati, the great M ahat, evolved? Brhati, the great Mahat, is born of the great measure of M other Prakrti. Thus maya, the changing world, is born of Maya, Prakrti, which is the Lord Omnipotent's own potential, Shakti. (In other words, the changing world is the mutable version of the Lords constant Prakrti potential). M atali, the mind, too is born of Maya and acts as the driver of the body chariot of the human soul. (See Kathopanishad, 1, 3, 3-4). 
2166 :The Heaven above is a Pratima, existential symbol, of Vaishvanara, cosmic Spirit that watches and loves the world of humanity while Agni, terrestrial fire presence of Divinity, pervades the earth and separates and holds both earth and sky (intheform of Vayu). From that level of light and truth, the sixth above the terrestrial, come all hymns of Divinity and, at the end of the cosmic day, go back to the same sixth from here. 
2167 :O Kashyapa, sage of divine light and vision, we six sages and seers and seekers, ask you, because you are the versatile that join what is meditated upon and what is worthy of being meditated upon: They say that the Vi rat, Hiranyagarbha, the Golden Egg of the cosmos, is the progenitor, i.e., the reflector, of theSpirit Divine. Pray speak to us, friends and admirers, of that Virat and all its dimensions. 
2168 :(In the language of Yoga, the six sages can be described as five senses and the mind, that is, manas. Kashyapa, then, would be Buddhi or Chitta which, in medi tati on at the V i tarka and V i chara I evel s, ref I ects al I objects of meditation, gross or subtle. Refer to Patanjali's Yoga-sutras I, 17, 42-45, and IV, 23.) Virat is the refulgent blue-print of cosmic existence in the highest heaven of Divinity. O seers, on the initiation of the creative impulse, it comes into motion, and with that motion all activities of cosmic yajna come into motion. When that initiation and motion stops, everything stops. In the generation and law of Virat, the lord all pervasive ‘moves' with the motion. That Virat is in the ultimate heaven, the consciousness of Divinity. (To understand the 'motion' of Divinity, refer to Y aj urveda 40, 4:' 11 moves and yet 11 it does not move'. Refer to science also: If sometheing moves at a velocity faster than the velocity of light it becomes omnipresent. And the omnipresent does not move, becuase there is no further space for it to move.) Itself unbreathing, it moves with the motion of the breath of the breathing ones, and then, and thus, V i rat rad i ates u nto i ts o w n ref u I g en ce. V esti ngthewhole world in correspondence with their form, function and motion, Virat is all pervasive and self-existent. Some, men of vision, see it, others don't. 
2169 :Who knows the pervasive interfusion of Virat with things in existence? Who knows its passage with time and seasons? Who knows its power and possibilities? Who knows the infinite variety of its creative forms? Who knows the domain of its power and splendour? W ho knows the infinite spectrum of its self-refulgence? This Virat is that divine consortive power and presence which first arises as the dawn of creation and, pervading everything far and near, vibrates in them all. Greatest of the great abide within it and, like a new bride, ever fresh and new, it captivates and, as mother, wins over all that is. 
2170 :Day and Night, free and beautiful of form, consorts of the sun, shining with golden light of the morning and evening dawn, alternate and go round their common centre and origin. Unaging, abundant powerful, with their distinctive flag, they go together in their orbit without missing their mark. 
2171 :Three aspects of Nature, which is divine Shakti, proceed and follow their course of action in pursuance of the laws of Rtam, eternal Law of Divinity. Three creative vitalities proceed and follow their course of action in pursuance of the creative desire of Divinity. One animates, impels and promotes the children of nature with self-fulfilment. A nother creates and sustains the dynamics of existence for life with energy. A nd yet another watches, preserves, promotes and rules the social order of people dedicated to Divinity by the divine law. 
2172 :(This mantra is highly symbolic, it is like a scientific formula which can be interpreted in accordance with the reader's own awareness of N ature. Three aspects of Nature are: Sattva, thought transparence and sense of discrimination; Rajas, energy, motion, velocity; Tamas, matter, inertia, stability.Three Gharmas or creative vitalities are light of the heavenly regions, electric energy of the middle regions, and fire energy of the earthly regions. They can be termed as Ida, sarasvati and M ahi (Rg. 1,13,9), orasTisro Vachah (Rg. 9,97,34). Another version is: M antra Shakti, Tantra Shakti, and Yantra Shakti, or the Law, the Dynamics, and the Structures. Of the three regions: Earth gives us food and sustenance, sky gives us rain, and the H eavens give us light. All the three sustain life, each in its own way, with its own power.) The sages conceive and enact the yajna and thereby support the cosmic yajna. Two are the complementary parts of yajna: Agni, the fire, and Soma, thehavi, the food of fire. Further, the Rshis worship the Turiya, transcendent state of cosmic yajna beyond the world of Prakrti, which abides with the Divine Spirit. They also receive, recite and worship the mantric versions of the divine Word, Gayatri, Trishtubh, j agati, Anushtubh, and Vrhadarki, universal worshipful form of the Word, all bearing the message of bliss for the yajamana. 
2173 :In accordance with the laws and states of Prakrti's five stage evolution, as in accordance with the states of the earth in relation to its own movement on its own axis and around the sun, five are the lights of the dawn, five the showers of natural gifts, and five are the seasons, five the directions set in order with the fifteen facultied human being, all centred on one Divinity and mutually balanced asonemacrocosmic as well as one microcosmic personality. 
2174 :of Rtamfrom Prakrti: Prakrti, M ahat, Ahankara, subtle elements and mind and senses, gross elements, and Purusha. These six stages of cosmic evolution are the six-day yajna of creation. Six are the Samans: Brhat, Rathantara, Yajna-yajniya, Vamadevya, Vairupa, and Vairaja which carry the six-day yajna session. Six human faculties of perception and mind and six Samans correspond in life. And it is said there are six wide spaces and six heaven-and-earth complexes: Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, M aha, J ana, Tapa upto satyam. 
2175 :Six are cold months, six are hot months, so say the wise. Say which season is left out. Seven are the rays of light which radiate and abide in space. Seven are the poetic forms in which Vedic knowledge is stated: Gayatri, Ushnik, Anushtup, Brhati, Pankti, Trishtup, J agati. And seven are the karmic commitments for the performance of yajna. 
2176 :Seven are the homas, fire yajnas: Agnihotra, Darsha, Paurnamasa, Vaishvadeva, Varunapraghasa, Sakamedha, Shunasiriya. Seven are the fuel sticks, i.e., seven flames (M undakopanishad 1, 4, and Yajurveda 31,15). Seven are the honey sweets (A tharva, 9,1, 22). Seven are the seasons (Sharad, Shishira, Hemanta, Vasanta, Grishma, Varshaand seventh is the intercalary, thirteenth, month of the lunar calendar (Atharva 13, 3, 8). Seven are the Ajya materials of life as a yajna, i.e., delicious gifts of heaven and earth for the joy of life (Shatapatha 2, 4, 3, 10) such as the lustre of life, thunderous strength, the beauty and flavour of living, desire for love and fulfilment, truth, freshness and life itself as yajna, which are everybody's gift and privilege. A nd these privileges clamour for righteous fulfilment, thus say the wise as we have heard. 
2177 :Seven are the chhandas, poetic compositions, of Veda mantras, successively increasing by four syllables each. Every previous chhanda is subsumed in the number of the syllables of the next higher one. H ow do the songs of celebration interfuse with the mantra structures? How are the chhandas interfused with the music of the celebrative songs? (In Yajurveda 14, 23 various stomas are mentioned as Trivrt, Panchadasha, Saptadasha, Ekavinsha, etc.) How is Gayatri integrated with Trivrt? How is Trishtup integrated with Panchadasha? How is Jagati integrated with Trayastrinsha? How Anushtup? How Ekavinsha? Eight are the material variations of Prakrti, material cause of the universe. They are the first born of Prakrti from her dynamic state according to the laws of Rtam, and they are the divine conductors of theyajna of creation (with the individual soul at the micro level and with Ishvara at the macro level). And Prakrti, imperishable mother of eightfold creativity and eight evolutionary forms, having run its creative course, recedes into its primal state of potentiality whence it can be invoked again for the next cycle of creative evolution. 
2178 :O children of divinity, thusfeeling and enjoying the grandeur of being, I have come to this cosmic form of existence for love and friendship with you as mother, and as such I am all peace and bliss. May this yajna of evolution risen into existence as you and the lord manifested be good, kind and blissful to you. The Lord knows all your hopes and ambitions and He is ever with you in all matters of life and existence. 
2179 :Eightfold physical complex of nature in the human version, six seasons of the year in relation to earth and the sun, sevenfold mind-sense complex of human intelligence, all waters and dynamics of nature and the herbal complex, all these as the five pranas sustain and maintain humanity. 
2180 :Only the ever youthful Nature as M other Cow, primesourceof lifeand sustenance, yields the delicious milk of life for the human soul for thefourfold fulfilment of Dharma, Artha, Kama and M oksha for all the four types of people: divine, creative, average and even negative personalities. 
2181 :Who is the M other Cow? Who is the One and only visionary creator of the poetic universe? What is the ultimate haven and light supreme? What is the One of all the blessings? Who, of what sort, is that One adorable Divinity on earth beyond the change of seasons? One and only one Supreme is the M other Cow, sole generator, One visionary creator, the One self- refulgent haven and home, One blessing that comprehends all, the One adorable on earth, constant beyond all change of seasons whom none can reach, none comprehend, none exceed and none transcend. Brahma Supreme. 
2182 :theme, in continuation of 5,1 and 8,9. It has six thematic variations which have to be interpreted not as different but as complementary and developmental. 
2183 :Virat, the state of nature, was there before this state of organised order. When Virat arose (as a state without organised order) everyone grew conscious and feared: This state will continue as it is. (That state of natural freedom might deteriorate into disorder, this could be the fear.) That evolved, ascended, and settled in the Garhapatya Agni, sacred fire of the home, i.e., in the institution of marriage, home and sanctity of thefamily. 
2184 :One who knows this becomes a performer of the home yajna and master of the family home as a sacred institution. 
2185 :(The family is an organismic unit and the basic prerequisite of a happy society.) Vi rat ascended and evolved and settled in the Ahavaniya Agni, sacred fire of the home with social obligations and dedication to the community as a sacred institution. 
2186 :The one that knows this of the social evolution of life evolves and becomes favoured of the divinities of nature and humanity. The divinities respond to his yajnic call and join him in his yajnic celebration of the happy home. 
2187 :She, Virat Spirit of divinity, evolved further, took another step and settled in Dakshinagni, the sacred fire of social expansion and cohesion. 
2188 :The one that knows the importance of Dakshinagni becomes a leader in the art of yajnic organisation of society, respectable, and a provider of shelter and protection for the community at the local level. 
2189 :Virat proceeded further and higher and settled in the Sabha, i.e., the Assembly at the organisational level. (SeeAtharva-veda 7,13,1) The one that knows this with the importance of the Sabha becomes worthy of the membership of the Sabha (with his dedication to theAhavaniya and Dakshinagni and to the Sabha) and people worthy of theSabhafollow him and comeand join theSabhaunder his leadership. (Refer to Atharva-veda 7,13,1) Virat proceeded further and higher and settled in the Samiti, Senate higher than the Sabha level. 
2190 :W hoever knows thus the importance of Samiti (at the inter-organisational level) becomes worthy of the membership and leadership of the Samiti and people worthy of Samiti come and join the Samiti under his leadership, (see Yajurveda 12, 80) Vi rat proceeded further and higher than Samiti and settled in the Samantrana, M inistry organisation of the Samitis (SeeAtharva-veda 3, 5, 7 and Yajurveda 8, 37) Who knowsthisimportanceof the Sabha, Samiti and Amantrana in the ascending order rises to be a member and, further, President of the Amantrana, and ruler, and people worthy of A mantrana come and join the Amantrana under his leadership. 
2191 :(This Sukta thus describes the social organisation in an ascending order from the family and home to community, assembly, i.e., Sabha, Samiti, i.e., Senate, and the Amantrana, Supreme organisation, of the nation and of the world.) Vi rat evolved further, rose into the sky, strode around in the four quarters and settled there in all its power. 
2192 :Devasand humans said of her: This is the same that knows and bears ail that by which both of us, Devas and humans, would live and be sustained. Let us call upon her. 
2193 :O Spirit of food, energy and pranic vitality, come. ComeSvadha, spirit of wealth and independence. Come Sunrta, spirit and voice of Truth. Come Iravati, bearer of food and water. 
2194 :I ndra, electric energy of the middle region was the dear child of Virat, the Universal Cow, Gayatri was the rope that keeps the cow sti 11 and stable for mi I ki ng, and the cloud was the udder wherefrom the milk for food, energy and self-sustenance with truth is received. 
2195 :B rhat and Rathantara Samans were two udders of the Virat, Universal Cow. Yajnayajniya and (B rhat and Rathantara have also been interpreted as the wide space and the beautiful world. Yajnayajniya and Vamadevya have been explained as Vedic knowledge and the world of five elements.) Devas received Oshadhis, herbs and trees by Rathantara Sama from the beautiful world, and boundless expansion by B rhat from boundless space. 
2196 :They received waters of life by Vamadevya from the beautiful world of five elements revealed by Divinity, and they received the science of yajna by Yajnayajniya from the Vedic knowledge. 
2197 :For one that knows this science, Rathantara brings the wealth of Oshadhis and Brhat brings expansion and progress in abundance. 
2198 :brings the waters of life, and Yajnayajniya brings the gifts of yajna in abundance. 
2199 :Virat evolved further and ascended. It came into herbs and trees. The herbs and trees received it. It manifested in growth through the year. 
2200 :F or that reason, that of the herbs w hi chi s pruned orcutregrowsintheyearwith new life. Onewho knows this process of nature grows and progresses in time afresh and his lovelessness and jealous rivalries are pruned off. 
2201 :Virat proceeded on and came to the Pitaras, parents and seniors. Parents and seniors received and welcomed it. It joined and manifested in the month. 
2202 :For that reason, homage is offered monthly and fortnightly to the Pitaras. One who knows this knows the path of Pitaras. 
2203 :Virat proceeded on and came to the Devas. Devas received and welcomed it. It joined and manifested in the half month. 
2204 :That is why people offer half monthly homage to the Devas. One who knowsthis knowsthe Devayana path. 
2205 :humans received and welcomed it. It joined time and manifested every day. 
2206 :For that reason they bring homage of food for men and women every day. One who knows this, to him nature's laws bring food and energy every day. 
2207 :Virat proceeded on and went to the A suras, natural men, lovers of pleasure and excitement. The A suras called upon her at the closest: O Maya, wondrous power, pray come. 
2208 :Virochana, gallant lover of beauty, son of Prahlad, lover of pleasure, was then her vats, darling child. The vessel to receive the milk of life was made of iron. 
2209 :Virochana, of double head, one to think and the other to will, milked the Virat as mother cow and received only maya, gift of nature, mere pleasure and illusion. 
2210 :The A suras live by Maya, nature, on transitory pleasures of the senses. One who knows this becomes a life supporter for others. 
2211 :The story of Virochana, leader of A suras, and Indra, leader of the Devas is given in Chhandogya Upanishad 8, 7-12. Indra and Virochana both go to Prajapati for the knowledge of Atman. Virochana feels sati sf i ed w ith the message that the body i s the soul. I ndra does not feel satisfied with this message: He continues his enquiry and gets the answer thatAtma is beyond the body, pure, unsullied, free (8,12, 3). 
2212 :Virat proceeded onward and reached the Pitrs, the senior parental protectors. The Pitrs called upon her: O Svadha, self-assertive freedom, come. 
2213 :Of her, Yama, the law giver and ruler, was the darling calf-like child, deserving of the milk of the mother cow, and silvery was the vessel in which to receive the milk. 
2214 :The man that knows the beginning and the end, life and death, milked her in the silver vessel and received self-power, freedom and independent selfsustenance. 
2215 :The Pitaras live by self-dependence and freedom. One that knows life thus becomes a support for himself and others. 
2216 :She, Virat, arose and proceeded to humans. They called upon her at the closest: come, harbinger of food, water and energy. 
2217 :M anu, the man of thought and imagination, child of self-refulgent sun, became her calf-like child, and earth was the vessel in which he was to receive the mother's milk for sustenance of life. 
2218 :Prthi, the man seeker of advancement who was friend and disciple of Vena, the sage of knowledge and wisdom, milked her into the earth and thereby received the knowledge of farming and the gift of grain for food. 
2219 :They live by agriculture and grain for food, all humans live thus. Whoever knows this becomes a successful prosperous farmer and a support for life for others. 
2220 :She, Vi rat, proceeded, came to the seven sages, the seven addressed her at the closest: Come, harbinger of Brahman, knowledge and wisdom of Divinity, the very vision of the Supreme Soul. 
2221 :Of her, Soma Raja, the man self-ruler at perfect peace of mind and clairvoyance of soul, became the calf, recipient child of the mother divine. H is vessel to receive the vision was the chhanda, the Vedic verse. 
2222 :Her, Brhaspati, master of the infinite expansive Word, disciple of Angiras, sage of the very spirit and breath of life, milked, and received the knowledge, experience and vision of Brahma, the Supreme. 
2223 :The seven sages live and live by Brahma and austere discipline of Tapas. The one that knows and attains to this becomes blest with the light and lustre of Brahma-vision and becomes a life support for the seekers. 
2224 :She, Virat, arose and reached Devas, the divinities. The divinities addressed her thus at the closest: O cosmic energy, come and bless us. 
2225 :Of her, Indra, electric energy of the middle region, was the recipient child, and chamas, the cloud, was the bowl. 
2226 :Her, Savita, the self-refulgent sun, milked and received the energy for life. 
2227 :Devas, all cosmic divinities of nature, and of humanity too, live by that cosmic energy. One who knows thus and bears energy becomes a I ife support for all others. 
2228 :She, Virat, arose and proceeded to the Gandharvas and Apsaras. Gandharvas and Apsaras, ail radiant rays, showers of rain, streams of water and currents of wind, sustainers of earth and others such addressed her at the closest: O fragrance of divinity, come and bless us. 
2229 :Of Virat, Chitra-ratha, wondrous light of various radiation bearing the glory of the sun, was the baby calf and the flower and the leaf the bowl. 
2230 :H er, the lover of life and the abodes of life blest with the sun's glory, milked and received the fragrance of divinity. 
2231 :TheGandharvas, sustainers of the earth and the divine voice, and the streaming flows of life on earth and in space, live by that divine fragrance. One who knows this and knows thus becomes a living support for all. 
2232 :She, Vi rat, arose and proceeded to other people, unknown, obscure, unclassed, and some even exceptional. These others addressed her: Come, power and presence obscure and unknown, and bless us. 
2233 :Of her, Kubera, the man of special knowledge interested in listening, was the darling child, and the man uninitiated was at the receiving end. 
2234 :Her, Kaberaka, keen seeker of knowledge and organiser of knowledge in systemic form, milked as the mother cow, thus he explored the hidden and unknown. 
2235 :Others, the exceptionals, the obscure, live by the unknown and for the unknown. Such persons leave asideand reject whatever is sin and evil. Onewho knows this becomes a life support for others. 
2236 :She, Vi rat, arose and proceeded to the serpents. The serpents addressed her and prayed: O bearer of poison, come and give us the poison. 
2237 :Of her, the eminent specialist of subtle knowledge was the darling child, and bottle gourd the receiving bowl as well as the saviour. 
2238 :H er, the ruler and protector of the human nation and specialist of the earth and earth products milked to distil the poison, and isolated the poison and discovered the antidote. 
2239 :That poison the serpents live and live by. One who knows this becomes a friend of life and a supporter of others for life. 
2240 :Whoever the scholar whom Virat consecrates with the imperishable knowledge of poison and the antidote, he must counter the poison. 
2241 :If he does not or cannot counter the poison, he must determine and say: I must counter and destroy the poison with all my force. 
2242 :W hoever counters and destroys the purveyor of poison, counters and destroys the poison itself. 
2243 :W hoever thus knows this, for him, his negative rivalry, hate and enmity, even poison itself, is destroyed and eliminated. 
2244 :Note: This hymn is a conceptual projection of humanity in all its variety of character, class and organisation from the Utopian state of Vi raj a, brilliant innocence in the state of nature, upto the world organisation, with full appropriate powers of governance from the local level upto the world state: The ogranisation in ascending order being the family, the community, Sabha, Samiti and Amantrana: in modern version, the Panchayat, Pari shad, Assembly, Parliament, Senate and the U.N. (Section 1). All these levels of organisation are sacred reflections of the cosmic power of Divinity (Virat). 
2245 :The universe in Vedic thought is Purusha (Atharva, 19, 6, 4), a living, breathing, self-organising, sovereign system with autonomous constituents at different levels in ascending order from the individual microcosmic level (E karat Purusha), through the social organisation (Samrat Purusha), upto the macrocosmic level of the universe (Virat Purusha). 
2246 :Every onefrom the individual to the universe is a reflection of the DivineVirat, Cosmic Spirit, whatever the character or class of the person. The differences are consequences of the choice and performance of the individuals. I n the sukta, the classes are Devas, average humans, Pitaras, A suras, Rshis, Gandharvas, Apsaras, and Sarpas. All of them, even herbs and trees, reflect the presence of Divine Virat. Similarly Virat reflects in the sanctity of the social organisations from the top world organsiation to the bottom and basic unit, the family and the individual. 
2247 :Viratisthe cosmic mother. She grants whatever her children desire and choose to have. Ordinarily, Devas as well as humans need and desire food and energy, they have it. A suras want natural power and pleasure, they have it. Pitaras want svadha, they get it. Humans wantfood and farming, they have it. Rshiswant divine knowledge, they have the vision. Gandharvas and Apsaras opt for sweets of fragrance, they have it. Others want the secret and unknown, they have it. Serpents want poison, they get it. 
2248 :But we must reject posion because poison destroys, and it destroys, ultimately, the purveyors of poison too. 
2249 :This Sukta is the song of Madhu-kasha, 'honeyed goad', that passion and discipline of life and living which is an integration of love and law, passion and patience, urge and awareness, in short, a balance of Shreya and Preya, the true, the good and the beautiful for self-perfection under the divine dispensation. 
2250 :M adhu is honey sweet, kasha is the goad, the electric charge that breaks the cloud to shower in full force, also thedivinevoiceofVeda, and M other Nature's invitation to live fully unto perfection. 
2251 :From heaven and earth, from skies and the sea, from fire and wind, arises the M other's M essage, the urge to live and be, sweet and sour both. Having seen her, wrapped in immortal nectar, all her children are struck with love and awe, they feel inspired and rejoice at heart in spontaneous response. 
2252 :Mighty is the nectar sweetness, beauty and majesty of this divine Mother, universal in form and meaning of the Message. O Mother Divine, they say, you are the very life and essence of Space and Time, eternal, whence arises theM adhukasha, the urge to live, al I j oyous, that breath of I ife itself abidi ng at at the very heart of Immortality, the Word. 
2253 :People of serious thought and imagination severally watch and experience in various ways the power and presence of this M adhukasha in action on earth. They see that, unmistakably from both fire and wind, M adhukasha arises spontaneously, the lustrous child, in truth, of cosmic energy in storm and wind. 
2254 :M other of the light of stars, daughter and harbinger of the planetary supports of life, life breath of the children of earth and the centre source of the nectar of immortality, Madhukasha sojourns among mortals, wrapped in gold, replete with honey and showers of ghrta, lustrous light and grandeur of divinity itself. 
2255 :The invitation to live a honeyed life of beauty and order, the M other's M essage, Devas created: Lord Omniscient and the divine powers in manifestation articulated theVedic Word, holy sages received itwithin and spoke it out: The seed of it all was in the Golden Womb of Divinity, universal of form and variety of Naturein inception.ThedivineM otherSpiritof Divinity brings up that seed, newly conceived, to maturity of form and variety, and when it is born in fresh and full force, it manifests and proclaims all its realms of the universe come into existence. 
2256 :(That is the articulation, that is the reception, that is the Word of the M other Divine.) trove of her immortal soma of the heart, immortal, unviolated, infinite? Brahma, the wise visionary dedicated to the Word, he would rejoice in this inexhaustible fount of Divinity. 
2257 :He, Brahma, would know, perceive and apprehend the two inexhaustible founts of a thousand streams which flow uninterrupted and shower the inexhaustible energy and ecstasy of life for the one that can see. 
2258 :Continuously sounding again and again, mighty expansive bearer of food and health by showers of rai n, thundering aloud, electric energy goes on to its job of breaking the clouds of rain ; heating, energising and illuminating three orders of energy of earth, sky and the solar region, thus does lightning roar with thunder and moves on with clouds laden with vapours. 
2259 :Closely abiding by the widely moving energy of thunder, mighty generous and shining clouds laden with water rain down in showers. They bring down showers of rain and, thereby, desired food and energy for the man who knows the science of rain. 
2260 :O Prajapati, father and sustainer of living beings, the thunder and cloud is your language of power and generosity by which, generous lord, you send showers of strength and vitality on the earth. That thunder and lightning is the madhukasha of divinity with its gifts of food, energy and vitality, which arises spontaneously from fire and wind, lustrous child, in truth, of cosmic energy in fire and wind roaring with thunder. 
2261 :Just as soma is dear to the Ashvins in the morning session of yajna, so may the Ashvins, complementary currents of divine energy and the complementary powers of humanity such as father and mother, bring me physical, moral and spiritual lustre and bless me in the soul. 
2262 :j ust as soma is dear to Indra and Agni in the second yajnic session of the day, so may Indra and Agni bless me with physical, moral, intellectual and spiritual lustre in the soul. 
2263 :j ust as Soma is dear to the Rbhus in the third yajnic session of the day, so may the Rbhus bless me with physical, moral, scientific and spiritual lustre in the soul. 
2264 :(Three mantras 11-13 refer to not only the science of yajna but also the process of education. Soma is the student (Atharva 2, 13, 2 and 5) and Ashvins, Indra, Agni and the Rbhus are teachers of basic subjects and specialists of heat and electric energy and the technology of science and engineering. Refence may bemadeto Professor Vishvanath's commentary on these mantras and Sayana's comments on the Rbhus quoted therein.) Let me create honey in life. Let me pray for and achieve the honey sweets of life. Hey Agni, yajnic fire of discipline, brilliant teacher, I havecomewith milk in homage. Pray bless me with the light and lustre of spirit, character and knowledge. 
2265 :Hey Agni, lord of light, brilliant teacher, pray bless mewith thelightand lustre of life and knowledge. Bless me with progeny, good health and long age. Let the Devas, brilliancies of nature and humanity, know and acknowledge me. Let Indra, lord of power, know and acknowledge me with all the sages and seers. 
2266 :Justas honey bees collect, carry and store honey in the honey comb, so may the A shvins, harbingers of nature's and human gifts bless me with sweetness and light in the soul. 
2267 :Just as honey bees collect honey and add it to their store of honey in the honey comb, so may the Ashvins bless me with more and more light and lustre, brilliance of life and intellect, strength of body and mind, and splendour of personality. 
2268 :The honey sweets of life and vigour that there be in mountains and clouds, in cows and horses, and the power and inspiration that there be in the purest drink of divinities distilled and showered on earth, let that honey sweet of vigour and spirit be in me. 
2269 :Let the Ashvins, complementary harbingers of auspicious good fortune consecrate me with the sweets of honey bees so that I may speak to people in a language full of sweetness, light and the power of love. 
2270 :O Prajapati, lord sustainerof living beings, your voice is thunder, lightning and the cloud showers. Mighty generous as you are, with that voice you radiate light in heaven and shower food, power and glory of life on earth. All living beings live by that light and shower, and, by that very light, power and vigour of the voice, nature fills and replenishes food, energy and vitality for them on earth. 
2271 :The earth is your sceptre, middle space your treasure, the heaven your light of Voice, thunder your lash, and the golden sun your mark of divinity. 
2272 :Whoever knows the seven honey sweets of kasha is blest with honey sweets in life which are : Brahmana, ruler, cow, bull, rice, barley, and the seventh is honey itself. 
2273 :W hoever knows the seven honey sweets of life becomes master of honey. Whatever he gets becomes honey sweet. Such a man of honey, who knows the secret of honey, wins over all regions and stages of life. 
2274 :W hatever thunders in the sky is Prajapati himself manifested for his children. For this very reason, I, initiated in the love of eternal divinity, abide in the will of Prajapati and pray: O Prajapati, remember me, pray forsake me not. People become favourable to him whoever knows this, he abides with Prajapati and Prajapati never forsakes him. 
2275 :With offers of ghrta and fragrant materials into the sacred fire, I study, try to know and practice Kama, love and desire, will and determination, and the greatest object of love, great and noble Divinity, destroyer of enemies. O Kama, throw down my enemies. Praised and celebrated thus, pray throw them down with your mighty vigour and power. 
2276 :W hat is not pleasing to my mind, whatever does not please my eye, what gives no joy to me, what repulses me, that melancholy dream I reject and jettison for my life's adversary and, having prayed to the good of my soul, I write it off as nothing. 
2277 :O Kama, love and faith of my heart and soul, you are the formidable ruler of our will, desire and determination, pray put off the evil dreams, evil thoughts and ambitions, childlessness, homelessness, want and distress from us, and let them go back and find a place with that source and power which thinks and plans evil against us. 
2278 :O Kama, love and desire of the heart, O faith and determination, put off want and distress, drive off depression far out. Let all misfortune revert to my enemies and adversaries and fall upon our negativities themselves. O Agni, leading light and fire of love and life, burn out the deepest darknesses and the very stronghold of those distresses when they are thrown out. 
2279 :O Kama, lord of my love, life and faith, that Word of eternal knowledge, the Veda, which the poets say is the lazer beam of original light and vision of life, isyour darling daughter, and itistheholy cow which is the perennial giver of the very life and immaculate spirit of Being. With that light, pray, uproot all our adverse rivals that split our integrity. Drive them off so that my pranic energy, senses and mind, and the very life of me be free from the very root of existence (adversaries, adversities, negativities). 
2280 :With the mighty force of Kama, love of life, love and moral determination, with the power of Indra, lord omnipotent, Varuna, lord of judgement and choice, Raja, ruler of life in existence, Vishnu, Spirit omnipresent, with the inspiration and vitality of Savita, lord giver of life, and with the flames and fragrance of Agni, yajnic fire, I throw out the adversaries of my mind and soul just as a steady helmsman beats off the waves of the sea and rows the boat to the shore. 
2281 :May Kama, lord of my love and faith, mighty refulgent, all-watching, all-reaching presiding power of life, make my lifefreefrom negative elements of a split personality and conflictive society. May all divinities of nature be my guardian masters and all divinities and nobilities of the environment listen to this my call and join the united yajna of one humanity. 
2282 :O lovers of highest Kama, Supreme Lord of love, participating in this joint enterprising yajna here, sprinkled with ghrta emanating fragrance, share and rejoice, and create for me an atmosphere of love free from rivalry, hate and enmity. 
2283 :O Indragni, omnipotent force of divinity and leading light of life, together as riding the celestial chariot, pray throw down all adverse and negative forces which pull me off from divine centrality. O Agni, O Kama, fiery love and knowledge of life, burn off all meanness, darkness, and the very seat and source of hate, enmity and adversity of life already fallen down by the pressure and power of Indragni. 
2284 :O Kama, love divine, destroy all those forces that are my adversaries and enemies, throw them to the bottomless deep of darkness. Let them all be reduced to total inertness and disvitality. Let them have no life even for a day. 
2285 :Kama, Love divine, has destroyed all those negative forces and desires which could be my rivals and enemies and thus has made the entire world free from obstacles for my growth without bounds and inhibitions. Now may all thefour directions of the earth provide for me the means and materials of growth. Let all the six dimensional worlds bring me the ghrta for personal and social growth. 
2286 :Broken off from their stronghold, let them run adrift and flow down like a boat cut off from the moorings. Shot off by the arrow from the bow, there is Agni, leading light of knowledge, is a cleanser of the soul from rivals. Indra, strong determination blest by omnipotent Indra, is the destroyer of pollutions. Soma, peace and lustrous vitality of the spirit, is a protector of the soul from debilitation. Let the divine powers of the Spirit, which repel as well as protect, throw away this hate, enmity and rivalry. 
2287 :O people, let the rival force of negativities and impieties wander around, void of all powerful allies, cast away, hated, friends and powers all lost and deserted, sure of nothing. And just as flashes of lightning fall on the earth and crush, so may the divine illustrious lord ruler of life crush your rivals, adversaries and enemies to naught. 
2288 :This infinite cosmic energy, constant as well as dynamic, holds and sustains all things existentincluding thunder and clouds (making, breaking, evolving). So may Aditya, self-refulgent lord of cosmic energy, manifesting in action, commanding omnipotence, with his power and lustre, throw down our negative adversaries and enemies (and thus sustain us). 
2289 :O Kama, lord of love and creative desire, self sufficient of infinite power and presence, by the triple armour of peace and protection, boundless, infinite and inviolable, which you have created for the protection and promotion of spiritual, mental and material aspects of life, I pray, uproot our negative rivals and enemies so that my pranic energies, mind and senses, and my very life may get rid of these destructive elements of existence. Bless us with that knowledge divine. 
2290 :By the force and armour by which the Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, ward off and throw away the destructive elements of life, by which Indra, the ruling power, throws the saboteurs and other I aw I ess forces i nto deepest darkness, by that I ove, knowledge and power of action throw out far from this world whatever adverse elements there may be against us, O power of love and determination. 
2291 :O lord of love, knowledge and determined action, the way the Devas ward off and throw out the destructive elements of life, the way by which Indra, the rul i ng power, throws the savoteurs and other I aw I ess elements bound in deep dungeons of darkness, by that very power, policy and modality, throw out and down far from this world whatever negative elements there may be against us. 
2292 :The Eternal Spirit of divine love and creative desire, highest love and faith of the world of existence, was the first to manifest. No Devas, divinities of nature such as sun and moon, nor the noblest of humanity, nor the highest minds, sense and intellect, nor Pitaras, sustainers of life, nor all the mortals in existence have been able to comprehend It. For that reason, O Spirit Divine, all-comprehending, you are greater and higher than all the created forms, all times, all ways, the greatest indeed. Hence O lord of love and desire, loved and worshipped of all, I offer you salutations in homage. 
2293 :H owsoever far and wide heaven and earth with their expanse exist, as far as waters of the earth, sky and space roll and flow, as far as light and fire glow and radiate, you are greater and higher than all that, all times all ways, the greatest indeed. Hence O lord of love and creative desire, loved and worshipped of all, I offer you salutations in homage. 
2294 :A s far as the vast directions and interdirections of the world extend, as far as the expansive bounds of space extend and observe the bounds of H eaven, thence you are greater and higher than all that, all times, all ways, the greatest indeed. Hence O Kama, lord of love and creative desire, loved and worshipped of all, I offer you obeisance in homage. 
2295 :As far as the fire-flies of the heavens abound, as far as bats and bi rds of the earth and sky fly and soar, as far as the serpents of the trees grow and multiply, you are greater and higher than all of them and their growth, all time all ways, the greatest indeed. Hence O Kama, lord of love and creative desire, loved and worshipped of all, I offer you salutations in homage. 
2296 :(In this verse, words which ordinarily denote birds and insects do not really do justice to thetechnique of comparison as adopted in other mantras from 19 to 24. Therefore the suggestion offered by Professor Vishwamatha Vidyalankara that these words probably mean things of astronomical dimensions seems plausible. Let us look at the signs of the zodiac such as scorpio, capricorn, pisces, aries, taurus, etc. There is one constellation called M usca, which could be 'makshika' in Sanskrit, meaning'a fly', originally M usca australis, the southern fly beyond the solar system. Similarly Vrksha-sarpyahcould bePhalguni Nakshatra, which in astronomical illustrations is shown as a tree. Reference may be made to his note on this mantra in his translation published by Ramlal Kapur Trust, Bahalgarh, Sonipat Dist., Haryana, India. 
2297 :O Kama, O M anyu, lord of love, desire and passion for creation, passionately loved and adored by all, you are greater than those that wink like the stars at night and greater than those that stand still. You are greater than the sea and space. Theref ore you are greater and higher than all of them all times all ways. H ence O lord of love and passion for creation, I offer you salutations in homage. 
2298 :Neither wind nor fire, nor sun nor moon, reaches, much less comprehends, Kama, cosmic Spirit of love, passion and creativity. O Kama, therefore you are greater than all others all time all ways. Therefore, O Great One, I offer you homage and worship with salutations in obeisance. 
2299 :O Kama, lord of love and creation, loved and adored by all, gracious and blessed are the creative forms of your divine manifestation by which all that you choose to create becomes real and true. W ith those very graces, O lord, let your presence seep in and inspire our mind and character in the spirit. Let all sinful thoughts and intentions move far away, somewhere else. 
2300 :We build the house well designed, well proportioned and well measured to the last point of finish. Of the spacious, well ventilated house open on all sides, we bind, strengthen and firm up the joints, connections and interconnections to the last details of specifications. 
2301 :The joint, bond, connection, fixture, whatever it is of the whole structure of the home, open and all round ventilated, I secure firmly to full strength and balance with detailed instructions of specifications in clear unambiguous words and I do it as a master of the science of architecture. 
2302 :Whatever the builder has expanded, covered and reinforced, he has securely tied the joints with strong bondsto optimum strength. Wejoin and secure all wings of the house curing them with wind and water on the advice of the expert architect just as a sculptor carves and juxtaposes the parts of a statue with the whole figure and design of his imagination. 
2303 :Of the open and all purpose home, the bonds of beams and pillars, joints, traps, weather insulation with straw, indeed the details of all sides of the house, we secure, test and confirm to the full. 
2304 :Of the house of protection and honour of the family, wefirm up the bonds of clamps and connections, weather materials of roofing and wainscoting, and the total bonding of walls, corners and the roof for total balancing of the building. 
2305 :Those chandeliers, swings and hammockswhich have been suspended in the house from the ceiling for beauty, pleasure and comfort, we firmly fix. May the beautiful home of honour and protection, raised high, be auspicious for the health of our body and mind. 
2306 :for provisions of sacred materials for yajna and the kitchen. There is a vedi for homa and a kitchen with fire place for cooking. There is a women's retreat to meet and socialise. There is a hall of meeting for enlightened people. And thus the home is a bright, beautiful, auspicious place for good and happy people. 
2307 :Spacious, centrally situated on a large plot of land, imposing in view against a skyey background and studded with innumerable sky lights and beauties, designed, built and certified by a Vedic architect, we complete the beautiful home with a wreath of flowers at the door on the E ntrance ceremony. 
2308 :H ome, sweet home, whosoever takes you over and lives here, whosoever has designed, built and completed you to measure and specifications, may both of them, O protector of honour, inspiring a happy life in balanced measure, live a long life to thefull and total self-fulfilment. 
2309 :Strongly built, tightly secured, beautifully finished and decorated, O house, be taken over by this master residenttherewherewehavecompleted you part by part at every stage in detail. 
2310 :Sweet home, who measured you, who designed you, who built you, who brought over the building materials, he made you for the people. It is the lord on high, Prajapati, guardian of his children, who did it for his children. (The builder is an instrument of Prajapati). 
2311 :Sweet home, homage and salutations to him who made you, to him who gave whatever was needed, and we do homage to the master of the home. H onour and homage to Agni, holy light and sacred fire of the house. Honour and salutations to every person that did the service and who would do the service and hospitality to the visitors. And honour, love and salutations to you. 
2312 :Let there befood and plenty with love for cows, for horses, and for whosoever is born in the house. O creative home and family, O mistress of your children, we thus define all aspects of the life to be lived in the home. 
2313 :Sweet home, you cover, shelter and maintain the homely fire and the sacred yajna, and the people along with the animals. O creative home and family, O mistress of your children, we thus define the life to be lived in here. 
2314 :O man, O family, O lady of the house, in heaven, on earth, and in between them the vastness and liberality that there is, with that in view, I take on this house for you. Whatever space and area of the home, well measured there is, that I would convert into a treasure- hold of the best of life's wealth, and peace and joy of the inmates. With this hope, promise and resolution, I take over and enter this house. 
2315 :Bubbling with energy and enthusiasm of the inmates, overflowing with water, milk and nutriments, measured, built and secured on firm foundations on earth, bearing abundance of food of universal quality, O sweet home, pray never hurt the household and the master. 
2316 :Covered with grass against heat, wainscoted with thatch for insulation, nestling all immates of the house as soothing night is for the living world, you stay strong and gracious like a splendid elephant, secured as you are on earth. 
2317 :closed and secured for the night, I fix it for the day. May the sun uncover and illuminate the home covered in darkness at night. 
2318 :Founded by the Brahma, presiding priest of house-building yajna, measured and designed by the Vedic architect and constructed by intelligent and imaginative builders of poetic taste to the last specification of accuracy, may Indra and Agni, sun and air and the yajnic fire and fragrance protect the home, seat of Soma joy, peace and prosperity. 
2319 :A s one storey of the house is added to another, as one layer of integument is laid upon another, as one treasure is added upon another, thus things grow on in a simple progressive order lineto maturity and progress higher and higher, so in that very process of evolution mortal man emerges and from that very process the entire world evolves from one generation to another. 
2320 :N ested like a holy child in the mother's womb, I live in the house which isdesigned and builtwithtwo wings, four wings, six wings, eight wings, and ten wings, and which protects my honour and prestige in society. And there I live like the vital heat of life in the body. (This means that the family home is not an expendable something, it is integrated with the life of the family and every one member of the family). 
2321 :Home, sweet home of honour and prestige, protective and not violative in any way, facing you I come and enter straight through the front door. Fire and water therein are the first door to the yajna of truth and rectitude. 
2322 :I bear and bring these waters, free from ailments of consumption, the water indeed are destroyers of consumptive diseases. Thus do I sit and live in different quarters of the home with imperishable fire, home fire and the holy fire of yajna. 
2323 :Home, sweet home, let not the bond go loose for our sake. Let the burden, even if it be heavy, be light to bear and live with. We bear and build the home wherever we love to be, and love the home as a darling new bride. 
2324 :Homage and oblation to the beauty and grandeur of the east direction of the home. Homage to the divinities of nature and bri 11 ianties of humanity. To all these divinities and nobilities, honour, adoration and oblation in truth of word and faith. 
2325 :H onour and homage to the grandeur of the south direction of the home, and to all these divinities and nobilities in truth of word and faith. 
2326 :Honour and homage to the west direction's beauty and grandeur of the home and to all these divinities and nobilities in truth of word and deed. 
2327 :Honour and homage to the importance and grandeur of the north direction of the home and to these divinities and nobilities in truth of word and deed. 
2328 :H onour and homage to the grandeur of the home from the direction below and to the divinities and these nobilities in truth of word and deed. 
2329 :Honour and homage to the grandeur of the direction above of the home and to the divinities and these nobilities in truth of word and deed. 
2330 :H onour and homage to the grandeur of the home from all directions and to the divinities and these nobilities in truth of word and deed. 
2331 :(This sukta describes the architectural, aesthetic, social and living qualities of the home. Well designed, strongly structured, aesthetically beautiful, socially open, the house in not so much property as a part of the family, loved as a new bride. The most important word is 'Vishva-vara', open to nature on all sides to take in light and fresh air, and closed to none in social discourse and relationship.) The subject of this hymn is 'Rshabha' which ordinarily means 'the bull'. But, derived from the root ' R sh', to flow, to move, to reach, to attain', it means the strongest, best or most excellent of any kind or race as in the compound 'Purusharshabha'. Used by itself, it can mean: 'thebull' among animals, 'highestendeavour' among human activities, 'the scholar, ruler' among humans, 'the sun' among stars, 'the herb' in medicine, and the 'vital seed' in human fluids. 
2332 :In this sukta'Rshabha' means'the bull' as well as the 'highest Lord Generator of the cosmic flow of existence'. The meaning is to be interpreted in the Lord of a thousand lights and powers, Rshabha, ultimate source of nutriments and energy, bearing and vesting all forms of the world in the streams of existence, blessing the generous yajamana of life's yajna with wealth and well-being, creator and ordainer of the mighty sun and galaxies and radiations and explosions of lights and energies, the creative Supreme Brahma has spun and spread out the vast web of existence. 
2333 :The one that became the first and original manifestive cause of the flow of existence in the beg i n n i n g, th at becam e th e m aster c reato r an d su sta i n er, like the divine mother earth, of all creatures, master generator of the inviolable mother forces of nature and father of the evolving forms of creation, the same lord, we pray, may advance us into a thousand lines of growth and further progress. 
2334 :Rshabha, cosmic Purusha, all pervasive womb of existence, eternal constant, treasure-hold of the milk of life, bears nourishment for sustenance of the world just as he fills up the cloud with vapour. May J ataveda Agni, light of knowledge, gift of omniscience, bear and bring the vision of that divine presence by divine paths of meditative realisation for the human soul. 
2335 :Rshabha is father of the children of his creation, protector of all inviolables such as elements of nature and rays of the sun, words of the Divine Voice and earthly cows, creator of mighty rolling seas, stormy rivers and awful whirlpools. All pervasive, protector of the cosmic embryo, readily reachable to everybody, he is the nectar joy of experience denied to none. All sustenance of life from spiritual to physical nourishment such as milk, curd and butter is the gift of his natural vitality. 
2336 :Darling love and worship of the divines, it is the soothing balm of the human hearts in affliction. It is the very life and sweetness of waters, herbs and ghrta. Mighty powerful, it creates and gives us the taste and exhilaration of soma, and, infinite as it is, the cloud could be the one instance of its manifestive presence and generosity. 
2337 :O generous omnipresence, you bear the treasure trove of soma full to the brim. Creator of all living beings, maker of beautiful forms of life, we pray, O self- existent, self-sustaining lord, may all your creative powers that are manifested here be good and auspicious for us, and those that are there beyond our ken, pray give us for further progress. 
2338 :Rshabha is the infinite power of creation and natural evolution. They call it the Yajna, i.e., the performer as well as the performance of creative evolution. All Ajya, holy materials, energies, lights and laws, beauty and sweetness, all ghrta and fragrant essences, waters and vitalities, are held and deployed by its natural creative and generative power. O Devas, divines and brilliancies, let us pray: May Rshabha, bearing the power and function of Indra, Omnipotence, self-pleased, self-revealed, be kind and gracious to us. 
2339 :Those who are thinkers, poets of imaginative vision, men of stable mind and constant faith say: Rshabha is the omnipotence of Indra, the arms of Varuna, all-embracing space, the shoulders of Ashvins, dynamics of the existential circuit, and the force on top of M aruts, cosmic winds and storms of energy explosions. It is Brhaspati, infinite lord of expansive universe, that integrates materials of unimaginable variety and holds them together as one single living evolving reality of divine nature. 
2340 :O Rshabha, wielding universal nutriments and vitalities for growth, you create and promote the people of noble and divine nature. The wise call you Indra, the omnipotent, and adore you as the omniscient. The Brahmana who invokes and worships Rshabha in and through the Vedic voice of Brahma gives a thousand gifts of knowledge and piety through the single voice of the Veda. 
2341 :O Rshabha, Brhaspati, Savita, unbounded giver and inspirer of life, bears the life and vitality that is but yours. Tvashta's forms and Vayu's winds are but the very spirit that's yours, received and borne. O Rshabha, by mind and thought I invoke you in the cave of the heart, and as both heaven and earth are your seats of presence, so may clairvoyant vision and material existence of my life be your seats to manifest and bless me. 
2342 :As Rshabha that shines in suns and stars and pervades vibrant in planets proclaiming its power and personality loud and bold like Indra among the divinities, so may Brahma, scholar of the Vedas, celebrate with holy words and describe the variety of its manifestations in various parts and forms of existence. 
2343 :N ote: From mantra 12 to 17, there is B rahma's metaphoric description of Rshabha, theCosmic Purusha, Vishvarupa as it is called in mantra 22. To understand this description literally as celebration of the animal 'bull' would do no justice to the Purusha. If 'Rshabha' were to mean 'the bull' literally, then the human prayer in Rgveda 10, 166, 1: Make me the Rshabha among equals would be meaningless. 
2344 :To understand this description properly, we should remember that Veda is the knowledge of nature, humanity and Divinity. The three exist together in an organismic union of relationship, nature being theShakti of D ivinity and the mother of humanity (Shvetashvatara Upanishad, 1, 7). So the Veda often describes the humanity of Divinity and the divinity of humanity. For example, in Atharva-Veda 10, 2, 31, the human body is described as 'the invincible city of gods', and Divinity is described as 'thousand headed and thousand eyed Purusha' (Rgveda 10,90,1) 'thousand handed' (Atharva Veda 19,6,1), and even as 'thousand-horned Vrshabha' in Atharva-veda (4, 5,1) and Rgveda (7, 55, 7). 
2345 :The metaphoric, therefore, should not be confused with the literal meaning. And if one insists on the anthropomorphic interpretation of Divinity, as some scholars have done, let us further remember that in the 'literal style' even language has been described as four horned and three-footed (Rgveda 4, 58, 3), which description makes no sense unless we interpret the metaphor. 
2346 :Says Brahma, the visionary of mantra 11: The sides of Rshabha are of A numati, that is, knowledge in consonance with reality and rationality. The sides are of Bhaga, i.e., light and splendour of existence. And then says M itra, the power that sustains heaven and earth together: The knees are mine, no one else's, only mine, these. 
2347 :The posteriors are of the A dityas, solar children of nature, the loins are of B rhaspati, lord of N ature, the tail is of the divine blowing wind with which Rshabha gives the life breath to the herbs and trees. 
2348 :The intestines are of the spirit and energy of food. A nd the visionary says: The skin is of the cover of light, Surya, the chi Id of sun. A nd those that meditated on the Rshabha visualised and said: the feet themselves declare they are of the burden-bearer of the world. 
2349 :The bosom is of the one that loves and appreciates his people. The treasure-hold of life's pleasure reserved and preserved is of Soma, peace and joy. Thus proclaimed the divine sages come together who meditated on the Rshabha in fullness, though part by part. (Refer also to Shvetashvatara U panishad, 1, 3). 
2350 :They saw the vestigial growths were assigned to the days, the hoofs to the tortoises, the wastes to the worms and scavengers. 
2351 :They visualised that the Rshaba destroys evil with its horns, i.e., the blaze of its lustre and splendour, and it destroys want and distress by its benign eye. The master, protector and sustainer of the stars, planets and the words of eternal wisdom hears the good things we say and present in prayer. 
2352 :A hundred yajnas does he perform, no fires of the world ever afflict him, all divinities of the world inspire and bless him and bless that sage who invokes and worships Rshabha in words of theVeda and realises the Divine in the world of his creation. 
2353 :That sage who imparts the knowledge of Rshabha to the seekers of Divinity raises his mind and imagination to higher freedom and culture and in his own personality realises the higher quality of his inviolable vision and perceptions. 
2354 :Let there be plenty of lands, cows and higher culture of mind and senses with knowledge, and let there be noble progeny and friends, and the strength of body, mind and soul for the giver of divine knowledge of the Rshabha, and may all Devas bless him with all that which he desires for self-fulfilment. 
2355 :Let this mighty exuberant Rshabha, omnipotent Indra, bear and bring us honour and wealth of life, and awareness of Divinity. Let it bring us the fertile cow, the holy Word of knowledge abundant in love and nourishment, the ever obliging bliss at our will, the vision and wisdom of Divinity beyond the light of heaven. 
2356 :Mighty I ndra of golden glory and universal form all-manifest has come to us, bearing gifts of life and sustained progress from the clouds and oceans of space. May the Lord bearing health and long age, progeny and friends, honour and wealth be with us and bless us with O L ord of abundance at the cl osest i n presence, in this earthly home of our life and spirit, in the midst of this manly madness of noise, pray be close to us in direct awareness. Be close to us with the divine vitality of your generative creativity. Be close to us with the strength and valour of divine omnipotence. 
2357 :O children of the earth, people of the human nation, thus do we present before you the power and presence of this divine youthful Rshabha, all abundant lord of life. J oyously play, and enjoy life in the presence of this lord to your complete self-fulfilment. A nd never by nature in the essence forsake us. Be happy and abundantly fortunate and prosperous, stay with us with honour and wealth, and with health and nourishment, advancing in body, mind and soul. (Also refer to Aitareya Upanishad, 1,1-3) Aja means that which is unborn, which also implies that which is undying. Aja therefore is that which is unborn, immortal, eternal. 
2358 :Aja in Vedic language is the Trinity of three: Paramatma, Jivatma and Prakrti (Shvetashvatara U panishad, 1, 7 and 9). W hich one of these three is the Aja in this hymn? 'Panchaudana' clearly points to the Answer. 
2359 :'Panchaudana' means'thatwhich eatsfivekinds of food', i .e., the one that has five vari eti es of experience. Now, if you have an experience, you also feel the pleasure or the pain of it, which means that the experiences the experience and the sufferance (of pleasure or pain) are together. The Aja of this hymn, therefore, is that one of the three which is subject to experience and sufferance. 
2360 :Of the three, Prakrti is the object of experience, it is not the experiencer. The experiencer is aware of the experience and also of the pleasure or pain of it. Food for example does not have the awareness of its own attribute of taste, only the eater knows by ex per i en ce w h ether i t i s sweet o r b i tter o r, I ater, w h ether it is bitter-sweet or sweet-bitter (Gita, 18, 37). Prakrti, therefore, is not the Aja of this hymn. The Aja here is either Paramatma or J ivatma. 
2361 :So, which one of the two, Paramatma and J ivatma, is the Aja in this hymn? above sufferance. Therefore the one Aja that tastes the sweet as well as the bitter fruit of the tree of existence is thej ivatma as is expressed in Rgveda, 1,164,1, and in Atharva-veda 9, 9, 20: There are two birds sitting on the tree of existence. One of them tastes and relishes the fruit, the other just watches. The bird that tastes is the J ivatma. The other that sits on the same tree and watches is Paramatma. 
2362 :What is Panchaudana, the five kinds of fruit which the J ivatma tastes? The tree is the world of existence consisting of the five elements of Prakrti: A kasha (space), Vayu (wind and electric energy), Agni (light and fire energy), A pah (waters), and Prthivi (earth). The fruit or five kinds of food is the experience of" Shabda or the music of sound and language from A kasha, Sparsha or the romance of touch from Vayu, Rupa or the romance of form and beauty from Agni, Rasa or the taste of drink and food from A pah, and Gandha or fragrance of perfume from Prthivi. The organs of perception are the senses of hearing, touch, seeing, tasting and smelling with the ear, skin, eye, tongue and the nose. 
2363 :Aja in ordinary language also means 'the goat'. But, although the goat has senses and does, by instinct, experience things, yet it is not capable of knowing and, much more, not capable of the consciousness of knowing as the human being is (mantra-1). Therefore Panchaudana Aja is the human soul. 
2364 :O M aster, take over this child of nature, in the healthy state of mind and senses, admit him / her to the school of nurture and culture, and with love and affection lead him/her to the second birth of the rational and faithful person of education so that this devotee, knowing clearly and consciously, may rise to the state of holistic knowledge and noble action and, in comprehensive ways of life, having crossed through and over the deep layers of darkness and ignorance, may ultimately reach the third state, beyond pleasure and pain, of spiritual freedom and bliss in M oksha. 
2365 :In this yajnic course of education, yoga and Brahmacharya, I guide and conductyou, immortal soul, to the service of Indra, yajamana of the creative world yajna, on the path of your Dharma toward him, the society and the family. Take on and fight out all those weaknesses and enemies which hate and afflict us so that all brave children of the yajamana, those that institute this yajna, be free from sin and evil. 
2366 :O lord, cleanse the immortal soul, in every aspect, of whatever ill or evil it might have committed so that, knowing well its Dharma of duty and obligations, it may rise by pure and sanctified steps of knowledge and action and, watching all round all-ways with clear vision, cross over the darkness, ignorance and illusion of life, ultimately reach the third state, beyond pleasure and pain, of spiritual freedom and bliss in M oksha. 
2367 :O destroyer of the veil of darkness, remove the darkness and illusion of this ignorance by the lazer beams of radiant light. Be not proud, do not hate nor malign. Develop and strengthen the immortal spirit part by part of the personality, remove the veil shade by shade, and help the spirit rise step by step and abide in the third state, beyond pleasure and pain, of freedom and bliss of M oksha. 
2368 :I place the personality of the seeker on the fire of Brahmacharya discipline by the Rks. Pour the waters of purity and sanctity into the personality and character and keep it there in the crucible. O teachers of peace and thought, let it be covered in the light and fire all round so that, perfected to the finish, the person rises and proceeds to the world of the noble souls of knowledge and devout action. 
2369 :O spirit immortal, rise, seasoned, unafflicted and perfect at peace, from the fire of discipline, and from the crucible of fire reach up to the third haven of freedom and bliss. There is fire upon fire, light beyond light, so win this highest heaven of light above all the rest. 
2370 :The immortal soul is the vital immortal fire of life, which immortal, they also call the light, which, all and ever alive, they say, ought to be dedicated to Supreme Brahma. The immortal soul dispels all darknesses of ignorance and illusion far away when it is dedicated to the Lord Supreme in this world by a man of faith. 
2371 :Let the human in the world of five elements go forward in five ways; with the senses of perception, senses of volition, mind, memory and intelligence. Let him go forward for the realisation of three bright achievements: physical, mental and spiritual lustre, achievement of Dharma, Artha and Kama, knowledge of the creation, sustenance and involution of the worlds through the media of sense observation, super-sensuous experience and discriminative knowledge of Viveka between eternal and temporary. 
2372 :Let him thus win a place of honour among noble people of yajna on earth, and then rise to the state of M oksha, the third and highest heaven of bliss beyond pleasure, pain and paradisal joy. 
2373 :Hey Aja, immortal soul, rise and reach where noble souls of highest action abide and, likean irrestible lancer on the advance, cross the most formidable hurdles. The immortal soul in top condition of health and experience, dedicated with self-surrender to the S u prem e B rah m a p I eases the g en erou s g i ver w i th perfect satistation and fully justifies the gift of life, knowledge and enlightenment. 
2374 :Aja, immortal soul, bears itself, self- surrendered, Self established in the essence, and holds on to the divine Giver, in the third, highest, heaven of light, secure in the third, highest, state of stability beyond disturbance and fear of dislodgement, in the third, highest, state of divine bliss. O soul, dedicating yourself to Divinity in the state of five-element existence and five-fold pleasure of experience, you are, in reality, the universal treasure-hold of self-fulfilment, the one unique mother cow for the self. 
2375 :O Pitaras, parents, teachers, seniors, sustainers of life, it is your gift of the third, highest, light of Vedic knowledge and enlightenment which leads the human soul in the natural state to dedicate itself to Divinity. The immortal soul in its reality, self-dedicated to Divinity by itsfaith and devotion, dispelsalI darknesses of ignorance and evil and throws them far out in this life itself. 
2376 :One, who aspires to the state of noble souls of holy action and divine association, dedicates the immortal soul in the existential state to the Supreme Brahma. Such aspirant as you are, O Aja, aspire and win for yourself the rise to that divine state of life, and may you, accepted and loved therein, be good and auspicious for us too as a source of inspiration. 
2377 :Aja, the unborn immortal soul, is come into the world of existence by virtue of the light and love of Agni, self-refulgent Supreme Brahma. It is wise and vibrant by virtue of the omnipresent vibrance and omnipotence of Agni. May the Devas, divinities of nature and enlightened nobilities of humanity, help it to grow according to the time and season of its growth and to rise to self-fulfilment in whatever it desires, completes and offers through self-surrender towards whatever it wants to achieve. 
2378 :The aspirant to the state of fulfilment should surrender the warp and woof of his action and also whatever is the golden beauty of his achievement in the world as a gift of gratitude to the Lord Giver, and when he does so, then does he really achieve the states of highest being whether it is here on earth or in the heaven of light and bliss divine. 
2379 :O Aja, immortal soul, let these streams of divine soma of exhilaration, brilliant, replete with ghrta and honey sweets of bliss, reach you, sustaining yourself on earth and in the heaven of seven lights of solar divinity on top of the bliss of Supreme Brahma. 
2380 :O soul, you areAja, unborn and undying. O soul immortal, you are svarga, reaching to the heaven of bliss. Through you, the brilliant wise sages, A ngirasas, know and reach the heaven of light and bliss. May I too, knowing through the soul, realise and reach that heaven of holiness and bliss of Divinity. 
2381 :O light and fire of yajna and meditation in the state of communion, by that stream of bliss in samadhi through which you setaflow a thousand streams of bliss to the soul, by which you lead the soul's awareness to the lord omniscient, pray sustain this yajna of our communion unto the presence and experience of the divinities and bliss of our choice so that we may reach our goal. 
2382 :(Reference may be made to Patanjali's Yogasutras, 1, 22-23; 1, 39-41; 3, 49 and 54.) Panchaudana Aja, immortal soul in the state of five-fold existence and experience, matured and tempered through the crucibles of meditation and spiritual discipline, dispelssufferenceand adversity and wins the goal of its choice. May we too through that discipline win the states of light and bliss bright and blameless as the sun. 
2383 :Of the immortal soul's powers and potentials, acts and sufferance, in consequence of the divine law of Karma which the Lord has vested in the Brahmana and in the people in general, and of the powers and potentials, acts of freedom and sufferance, and of the food for body, mind and soul that I offer to the Brahmana and the people in general, of all that, O lord of light, Agni, you would know in the land of divine righteousness at the cross-roads of the paths we follow and travel by for ourselves and our destiny. 
2384 :Aja, Eternal Spirit beyond birth and death, was the divine power and presence that first stirred and manifested Itself ahead of this world of existence. This earth became his chest, the heaven and earth, his middle, the quarters of space, his side bounds, and the oceans of earth and space, his great womb of existence. 
2385 :Satyam, constant reality of existence, and Rtam, Law and Scripture of the dynamics of existence, these two were his eyes, the whole truth of existence and faith in that truth, his life breath, the boundless Prakrti, his head. In other words, this boundless yajna of existential evolution of divine creativity is what the adorable Aja is. It is the Lord Eternal who governs the world of five elements he manifests, projects, withdraws, consumes, projects, eternally. 
2386 :Whoever the person, conditioned by five elements of Prakrti and five-fold experience and sufferance yet enlightened by divine vision and yajnic spirit of self-sacrifice, that offers the immortal soul to the Eternal M aster attains to the state of unbounded yajna of divine creativity and secures the state of boundless bliss for the soul. 
2387 :N othing can break the bones, nothing can drain out the bone marrow, of this person who, having accepted and wholly surrendered to this Divine Presence, sees the same divine presence in every thing that exists. 
2388 :This and that, every thing that is, becomes for him the manifestation of Divinity, a very version of the divine Self. With that, he joins and moves his own self. And the yajnic system of existence distils and gives food, energy and life's grandeur to him who offers the immortal soul of five-fold existence clothed in light and generosity to the Lord Divine for his divine yajna. 
2389 :Five golden glories of pranic energy, five renewed koshas, vestments of the soul, and five senses, all efficient givers of perception for discriminative judgement, become his holy cows and serve him like universal benefactors when he offers the immortal soul of five-fold existence clothed in light and generosity to the eternal Lord for his divine yajna. 
2390 :All five golden glories of life become his leading lights and five sheaths of the soul become his five-fold armour for body and soul, and he attains the paradisal bliss of life who surrenders the immortal soul of fivefold existence clothed in light and generosity to the eternal Lord for his divine yajna. 
2391 :The woman who having married her former husband loses him (on death) and remarries and thus takes to the other, second, husband, and the husband and wife both submit their immortal souls clad in new existential identity of conjugality to each other and to the Lord divine, they never separate. 
2392 :The other, second, husband becomes one in life, in the home and in the family with the remarried wife and attains equality of good fortune if he submits his immortal soul of five-fold existence clad in light and generosity to the Lord divine. 
2393 :Having given a fertile cow with regular calving, a carrier bull, a full bed with pillow, clothes and gold as ritual gifts, they win grateful appreciation and well- deserved praise. 
2394 :Self-confidence, father, son, grand son, grand father, wife, mother, and all those dear to me and to the home and family, I invite to come and join me. 
2395 :Whoever the five-fold conditioned immortal that attains to the summer season of life and knows for certain that this is the season of heat and passion, who surrenders his mortal identity of immortality clad in light and generosity to the home, the family and the Lord Divine totally burns out the power and fortune of his hateful rival and rises in life with self-confidence. 
2396 :Whoever the immortal soul conditioned in the five-fold state of mortality that attains to the life-season called thetimeof action and knows for certain that this is the time and season for action, who surrenders his mortal identity of immortality clad in light and generosity to the home, the family and the Lord Divine, takes away the power, potential and good fortune of his hostile rival, in fact burns out and destroys the power and fortune of the hateful adversary and rises in life by the strength of his soul. 
2397 :Whoever the immortal soul conditioned in the five-fold state of mortality that attains to the life-season called the time of gathering and control and knows for certain that this is the time and season for gathering and control, who surrenders his mortal identity of immortality clad in light and generosity to the home, the family and the Lord Divine, takes away the power, potential and rising good fortune of his hostile rival, in fact burns and destroys the power and fortune of the hateful adversary, and rises in life by the strength of his soul. 
2398 :Whoever the immortal soul conditioned in the five-fold state of mortality that attains to the life season named growth, and knows for certain that this is the time and season for growth, who surrenders his mortal identity of immortality clad in light and generosity to the home, the family and the Lord Divine, takes away the growing power and good fortune of his hostile rival, in fact burns and destroys the power and fortune of his hateful rival and rises in life by the strength of his soul. 
2399 :Whoever the immortal soul conditioned in the five-fold state of mortality that attains to the life season named rise and progress, and knows for certain that this is the time and season for the rise and progress, who surrenders his mortal identity of the immortal dad in light and generosity in dedication to the home, thefamily and the Lord Divine takes off every step of the rise and progress of his hostile adversary, in fact burns and destroys the power and fortune of the hateful rival and rises in life by the strength of his soul. 
2400 :Whoever the immortal soul conditioned in the five-fold state of mortality that attains to the life season named victory and excellence, and knows for certain that this is the time and season for victory and excellence, who surrenders his mortal identity of the immortal in dedication to the home, the family and the Lord Divine, steals every step of the victory and excellence of his hateful rival, in fact burns and destroys the power and fortune of his hostile adversary and rises in life by the sheer strength of his own soul. 
2401 :O saints and sages, men and women, develop, season and perfect the immortal soul in its five-fold mortal condition. Strengthen, season and perfect the five-fold food for the body, mind and soul. O Lord, let all quarters of space together with their interspaces receive and approve it for you and return it to you with gratitude. 
2402 :O Lord, may those quarters of space, interspaces and the divine and human powers therein protect and promote this immortal soul inthemortal state. It is yours, it is for you, it is for them, the spaces, the divinities, and humanity. I offer this soul as the holy material of oblation dedicated to your service and all these. 
2403 :This sukta is a celebration of hospitality to Atithis, chance visitors, who happen to come to the household during their holy rounds. This hospitality is called Atithi Yajna prescribed as a sacred duty in the Vedic tradition. 
2404 :be performed by a house holder: B rahma yajna (Prayer), Devayajna(agnihotra), Pitryajna (service to parents and other seniors), Atithiyajna (hospitality to visitors), and Balivaishvadeva yajna (feeding birds and animals. 
2405 :Atithi yajna as described in detail in this sukta is so sacred that it is a microcosmic version of the macrocosmic yajna which, in the Vedic tradition, the universe is. Brahma, Lord Supreme, is the performer of the macrocosmic yajna, and Brahma also isthe supreme deity for which the yajna is performed. By analogy, in Atithi yajna, both the host and the guest are human versions of Brahma, one the performer, the other, the beneficiary. 
2406 :The sukta has 62 mantras divided over six parts. The part is called 'Paryaya'. 
2407 :One who would know Brahma first hand by direct experience may know that Brahma is that Supreme Purusha, Ultimate living Reality, which as a 'Person' is constituted of the entire structure of existence and its knowledge: whose spine is the Rks. 
2408 :W hose hair is the Samans, whose heart is called the Yajus, and whose cover-manifest is the form and function of the dynamics of universal yajna. 
2409 :A nd know: If the house holder as the host sees the Atithis, holy visitors, he sees an occasion for a personal performance of yajna in the service of Divinity. 
2410 :When he welcomes the guest, he receives Diksha, initiation into a holy commitment. When heasks if he could offer water and brings up water for the guest: The water he brings is water for yajna, and the water is as sacred as water consecrated by Divinity. 
2411 :When members of the host family bring refreshments for the guest, the refreshments are like oblations for Agni and Soma in yajna whereby the guest is identified with the very soul of yajna with the W hen they arrange for his restand comforts they arrange for the place of yajna and other preparations for it. 
2412 :When they provide for the bed, that is like spreading the holy grass on the vedi. 
2413 :W hen they elevate the bed, they raise themselves to higher bliss of divine nature. 
2414 :W hen they bring the mat, pillow and covering, these are the boundary sticks of the yajna fire. 
2415 :When they bring creams and ointments, these are like ghrta for the yajna. 
2416 :When they bring the appetizers before dinner, that is like soma juice for yajna. 
2417 :When they call upon the cook and for service, it is as if they call for the bearers of havi for yajna. 
2418 :When rice and barley are selected and offered to the guest, it is I ike the filaments of soma for the yajna. 
2419 :Things like mortar and pestle used in the preparation of food for the guest are I i ke the soma stones in the preparation of soma juice for yajna. 
2420 :The sieve is soma strainer, the chaff is soma pomace, and liquids are pressing gear. 
2421 :w j dfPclT^ u i Hl'M <44 £\ u i chc^vi i: ^wtp^oJirpf^ mjn'uHii^ci ^ujnr^H^ii *V9 ii The ladle is the ghrta-ladlefor oblation, thefork is the stirring prong, the jars are soma vessels, utensils are like soma cups, this earth is like the black antelope hide for a seat. 
2422 :When the host takes stock of things to be offered to the guest and assesses whether this is good enough or this, he does for himself the same job in A tithi yajna as the B rahmana does for the yajamana for the pi anni ng and performance of a yajna in the service of Divinity. 
2423 :When he says: 'Take up more, again, and offer itto the guest', by doing so he raises his life and energy higher and higher. 
2424 :W hen he takes up this more and brings it to the guest, it is as if he takes more of fragrant materials for the yajna, seats himself on the vedi and offers the Of these holy materials and delicacies brought up to him, the guest partakes unto himself as if he offers these to the divine spirit of yajna: With his hand as ladle, the guest offers food into his pranic vitality, it is as on the stake ring of yajna, as he chews and swallows the food, it is like uttering the holy formula of Vashatkara for the offering. 
2425 :It is these, the holy guests, high priests of Atithi yajna, whether dear favourites or otherwise indifferent, that lead the performing yajamana to the state of bliss and freedom of M oksha. 
2426 :who is free from hate and anger, accept the hospitality of the house hoi der. H e should not accept the hospital ity of the man of hate and anger, nor of the man of dubious character, nor of the man of doubt and suspicion. 
2427 :A11 those hosts whose hospital ity the holy guests accept and eat their food have their sins destroyed (by virtue of the Atithi yajna). 
2428 :All those whose hospitality the holy guests do not accept and do not eat their food have their si ns i ntact and active (by virtue of their hospitality having been rejected). 
2429 :H e that always offers hospitality to the guests, has his grinders ready, his filters wetsome, and hisyajna ever extended with love, faith and hospitality without hate, anger and violence remains sinless. 
2430 :He that offers food to the guests has his yajna of hospitality generously extended in faith for Prajapati Bravely generous is he, and he follows the universal generosity of Prajapati, who offers food to the guests (with love and faith without hate, anger and violence. 
2431 :For the host who performs A tithi yajnawith the offer of food and hospitality to the guest: The 'fire' of the guest's hunger is Ahavaniya Agni into which the oblation of food is made; the warmth of hospitality in the home with which the offer of rest and comfort is made to the guest is Garhapatya Agni which is always kept alive; and the fire of the hearth on which the hosts cook food for the guest is Dakshinagni, the fire of holy generosity. 
2432 :devours the merit and piety of all his Ishta and Purtta acts, i.e., he devours the merit of his obligatory acts of prayer and yajna, and particular acts performed for worldly purposes. 
2433 :The host that eats before the guest has eaten destroys the pleasure and decency of all his milky and juicy delicacies. 
2434 :The host that eats before the guest has eaten negates the energy and prosperity of the house. 
2435 :The host that eats before the guest has eaten devours the wealth of his people and property of the home. 
2436 :The host that eats before the guest has eaten demeans the honour and reputation of the house. 
2437 :The host that eats before the guest has eaten violates the grace and culture of the family. 
2438 :The guest being a man of knowledge, culture and enlightenment, the host must not eat before him. 
2439 :For soulful performance of the yajna to its compl eti on i n the essential spirit and for the continuance of the family's yajnic tradition without break, the host should eat only after the holy guest has been served to his satistation. This is the law. 
2440 :Whether it is something delicious, a cow product, milk or curd or cheese, that also the host must not eat before the guest has eaten. 
2441 :The host, knowing thus the law and tradition, who pours milk, sprinkles it with delicacies, and offers it to the learned guest... 
2442 :Attains as much merit of virtue as he would attain by performing an elaborate Agnishtoma yajna. 
2443 :The host, knowing thus the law and tradition, who takes up ghrta preparations, sprinkles these with delicacies, and offers to the learned guest... 
2444 :Attains as much merit of virtue as he would attain by performing an elaborate A tiratra yajna. 
2445 :The host, knowing thus the law and tradition, who takes honey sprinkled with delicacies and offers it to the learned guest... 
2446 :Attains as much merit of virtue as he would attain by performing an elaborateSattrasadyasession of yajna. 
2447 :The host, knowing thus the law and tradition, who takes curds and cheese sprinkled with delicacies and offers these to the learned guest... 
2448 :Attains as much merit of virtue as he would attain by performing an elaborate Dvadashaha, twelve day session of yajna. 
2449 :The host, knowing thus the law and tradition, who offers only water, having purified and sanctified Rises to the honoured position of being the father of a great family and becomes a dear favourite of his people around. Thus fares the man of hospitality who offers water, clean and sanctified, to a learned Atithi. 
2450 :For the host and the household that knows the law, tradition, rules and manners of Atithi yajna in honour of the learned guests, nature sings songs of celebration. 
2451 :This part of the sukta uses musical terms of Sama songs: Hinkara, Prastava, Udgitha, Pratihara and Nidhana. (Refer to Chhandogya Upanishad, 2,1-7) For the host that knows and follows the laws and etiquette of Atithi yajna, the Dawn sings the Hinkara, melody of refreshment and awakening into light. Savita, the sun, sings the Prastava, rising song of progress. 
2452 :Brhaspati sings the exciting Udgitha, rousing song of victory, Tvashta, the maker, sings the Pratihara with the music of peace and growth, and Vishvedevas sing the Nidhana, song of success and fulfilment. 
2453 :Thus the host that knows and follows the discipline of Atithi yajna acquires plenty of prosperity, family and friends, and the wealth of cattle. 
2454 :For the host who knows the law and discipline of Atithi yajna, the rising sun sings the Hinkara, and with the radiance of the rays it sings the Prastava, song of rising excitement. 
2455 :The sun on the zenith at mid-day sings the U dgitha, in the afternoon it sings the Pratihara, and, as it proceeds to the evening for setting, it sings the N idhana, song of completion and fulfilment. Thus does the host that knows the etiquette of Atithi yajna acquire plenty of prosperity, family and friends, and the wealth of cattle. 
2456 :For the host who knows, the cloud, being heavy with vapour, sings the H inkara. Thundering, it sings the Prastava. 
2457 :While raining in showers, it sings the Udgitha. Flashing with lightning, itsingsthePratihara. And when it rises and floats away after rain, it sings the N idhana. Thus does the host that knows this and the law and etiquette of holy hospitality acquire plenty of prosperity, family and friends, and the wealth of cattle. 
2458 :W hen the host beholds the guest, he feels happy and expresses his joy with FI inkara. W hen he greets him, he appreciates the visit with the expression of Prastava as he offers the hospitality. W hen he requests him what he would like to have, he expresses his joy as if he sings the Udgitha. 
2459 :When he brings and offers water so that the guest feels fresh, that is like singing the Pratihara. A nd when the guest has accepted that part of hospitality with more than satisfaction, the surplus is Nidhana, close and fulfilment of the hospitality then. 
2460 :Thus does the host who knows the rules and manners of hospitality win satisfaction and fulfilment and acquire plenty of prosperity, family and friends, and abundance of cattle and other property. 
2461 :When the host calls upon the cook, it is the Adhvaryu calling upon the Agnidh to the yajna. 
2462 :When the cook hears and responds, it is the Agnidh responding to the Adhvaryu. 
2463 :When the servers with serving trays in hand come, one and all, they are yajna participants holding yajnic ladles in hand. 
2464 :W hen the chief host, having served the guests, goes back to his quarters, he goes to the Avabhritha ablutions after completion of the yajna. 
2465 :W hen he distributes, he offers Dakshina to the priests. When he follows them to see them off and say good-bye, that is completion of the yajna. 
2466 :The host that knows the rules and traditions of the etiquette of yajnic hospitality to be extended to the holy guests, when invited anywhere on earth, enjoys all that variety on earth which the invited guest enjoyed in that Atithi yajna in that home. 
2467 :The host, invited to the middle regions, enjoys all that variety in the middle regions which the invited guest enjoyed in that Atithi yajna in that home. 
2468 :The host invited to the heavenly regions enjoys all that variety in heaven which the invited guest enjoyed in that yajna. 
2469 :The host invited among divinities enjoys all that variety among divinitieswhich theinvited guest enjoyed The host invited among different worlds enjoys all that variety in the worlds which the invited guest enjoyed in that yajna. 
2470 :He is invited, invited again and again as the guest was. 
2471 :In this Sukta the universe is described as a cow in the metaphorical sense, Cosmic Organism as it is. 
2472 :Prajapati, the Divine Power that sustains the forms of life, and Parameshthi, the Supreme Presiding Presence, these are the two horns of the Cow, that is, of the universe. Indra, Omnipotence, is the head, Agni, cosmic fire energy, is the forehead, andYama, the Law, is the neck joint of brain and the body. 
2473 :Soma Raja, ruling bright joyous vitality, is the brain, the region of light, the upper jaw, the earth, the lower jaw. 
2474 :Lightning is the tongue, M aruts, winds, are the teeth, Revati, the star, is the neck, Krttikas are the shoulder, and Gharma, heat and light energy, the withers. 
2475 :The world of existence is the life breath, greenery of life is paradisal bliss, cosmic balance is the resting place at the centre. 
2476 :Cosmic dynamics is the bosom, firmament is the belly, Brhaspati is the hump, expansiveness is the vertebrae of the spine. 
2477 :The powers that sustain the forces of nature are ribs of the back, planets are ribs of the chest. 
2478 :M itra and Varuna, sun and moon, are shoulder blades, Tvashta and Aryama, making and guiding powers, are upper arms, M ahadeva, supreme power of divinities of nature, is the twin motive forces of the universe. 
2479 :Indrani, energy, is the hips, wind is the tail, waves and currents are the hair. 
2480 :Brahma and Kshatra, intelligence and order, are the loins, strength is the thighs. 
2481 :Dhata and Savita, sun and gravitation, are the knees, magnetic forces are the shanks, rays are dew- claws, the earth is the hoofs. 
2482 :M emory and mind istheheartcore, assimilative power is the liver, rule and fast is the intestines. 
2483 :H unger is the assimilative power of digestion, food is the colon, mountains are the muscles. 
2484 :Anger is the kidneys, passion is the scrotum, children are the creative urge. 
2485 :World covering space is the skin, herbs and trees are hair, clusters of stars are the form. 
2486 :Serpents and demons are rectal muscles, humans are intestines, eaters are the stomach. 
2487 :Abiding eastwards, it is Indra, abiding southwards, it is Yama. 
2488 :Facing westwards, it is Dhata, abiding northwards, it is Savita. 
2489 :In will and desire, it is Mitra, vibrant and ecstatic, it is Ananda. 
2490 :In the act of creative harness, it is one with universal natural forces of evolution, pervasive o m n i p resent, i t i s P raj a pati, S el f- rel eased o n d ev o I uti o n, it is all in one. 
2491 :It is thus this universal form, All-form of the cosmos, metaphor of the Cow. 
2492 :To one that knows thus the Cosmic metaphor of the Cow, all living forms of the world, of all shapes and functions, present themselves simultaneously as One and All, the living, breathing, self-existing, allfunctioning Universal Cow: All in One, One in all. 
2493 :With careful diagnosis, prescription and treatment we cure you of all your ailments of the head: headache, neurological disturbance, earache, paleness or ruddiness on the face due to underflow or overflow of blood. 
2494 :With careful diagnosis and treatment we cure all your neurological ailments: we cure your growing earache from your ears and the inner parts of the ears. 
2495 :By the method of treatment with which the pain is removed from the ear and mouth, we expel your neurological ailment with proper diagnosis and prescription of medication. 
2496 :The cause that makes a person deaf and dumb or blind, all that neurological trouble of yours, O patient, we expel from your head with proper diagnosis and treatment. 
2497 :Rheumatism that spreads all over the body part by part, fever that pains all over the body, and all ailments of the head we remove with proper treatment and medication. 
2498 :The terrible fever whose onslaught shakes the patient all over and lasts for the whole year, we cure and expel with proper diagnosis and treatment. 
2499 :The consumption that starts and spreads through the thighs and rises to the groins, we uproot from the interior of your limbs with proper diagnosis and treatment. 
2500 :If the B ronchitis or Phthisis arises from worry and desire or from hate, anger and jealousy, conscious or unconscious, affects the heart all over and spreads further, that consumption we expel from the heart and other parts of the body with proper diagnosis and treatment. 
2501 :Jaundice and anaemia from all your body system, chronic wind, indigestion and pain from the intestines, and consumption, cancer and the very fear and suspicion of it, we expel from your body and mind with proper diagnosis and physical and psychic treatment. 
2502 :Let the consumption go out to dust through the cough, letthechronic indigestion and pain flow outwith the urine. Thus do I speak of the curative formula of the poison of all consumptive diseases. 
2503 :Let the disturbing ailment of wind and indigestion go out of your stomach through the excretory organs. Thus have I spoken of the curative formula of the poison of ail consumptive diseases. 
2504 :I have spoken to you of the formula of the removal of the root and poison of all consumptive diseases from your abdomen, lungs, navel and the heart all over. 
2505 :Let the germs, ailments and dire pains which flow with the blood to the head and afflict the top of the brain turn unafflictiveand un-infectiveand let them flow out of the system through the excretory organs. 
2506 :Let the germs, ailments and dire pains which flow with the blood, affect the heart and spread over the chest bones turn unafflictive and trouble free and let them flow out of the system through the excretory organs. 
2507 :Let the germs, ailments and dire pains which affect the sides and pierce the bones of the back of the chest and the spine turn unafflictive and trouble free and let them flow out of the system through the excretory organs. 
2508 :Let those that run cross-wise on the sides in the blood vessels turn unafflictive and trouble-free and let them flow out through the excretory organs. 
2509 :Let those that affect the rectum and desensitise the intestines turn unafflictive and trouble free and flow out through the excretory organs. 
2510 :Let those that drain the marrow and afflict the vertebrae turn unafflictive and trouble free and flow out I have given you the formula of the elimination of the root and poison of all the consumptive diseases, fevers, cancers and gripers which afflict, inflame and exhaust your body systems. 
2511 :I have given you the formula of the elimination of the root and poison of all the consumptive diseases, infective and contageous, heart sore, rheumatic and allergies. 
2512 :I have eliminated the pain and diseasefromyour feet, knees, hips, loins, spine, back of the neck and the head, with careful mantric diagnosis and formulaic medication. 
2513 :O patient, may the skull bones of your head and the beat of your heart be healthy and harmonious, while, O Rising Sun, with your radiant rays you have eliminated the disease and relieved the racking pain from his body system. (Aditya here is a metaphor of the physician.) Of thissplendid, blazing and ancienthigh priest of solar yajna, which gives light and energy and takes the waters and essences of earth and sky, the second, younger and middling brother is Vayu, wind and electricity, abiding in the middle region of the sky, the energy voracious and present every where. The third and youngest brother is Agni, fire, which is sprinkled with ghrta and water. Here in the sun I seethesustainer of people and progenitor of seven I ight-chi Idren together in the spectrum. (Sapta-putram may also be interpreted as the father of seven planets, i.e., Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn preceded by Rahu and Ketu, Dragon's Head and Dragon's Tail.) Seven join the one wheel chariot of the sun drawn by one horse of light of seven names. The wheel, the wheel of time, unaging and automotive, has three sub-wheels with three naves and rims, three seasons, or past, present and future, three chronological divisions of time. And in this time and space orbit of the sun, abide all the worlds of the universe. 
2514 :Seven are those who ride this chariot, that is, seven motive powers, the rays of light, or the seven planets, wheels within wheel, which draw this chariot. They are seven moving sisters who exult and adore together with reverence the father wherein are hidden in depth seven names of the light, seven spheres, seven notes of music and seven metric forms of the Vedic language. 
2515 :Who saw the first material form of the universe of flesh and bone being born, which the immaterial progenitor of no flesh and bone bears? W hat and where was the breath and blood and soul of the earth and the universe? Who would goto the wizard of know ledge to ask all this of the first and last question about the mystery? Dear friend, here may speak to me he that well knows of the power and presence of this glorious Bird ever on the wing and omnipresent, which is concealed in mystery. The holy rays of itfrom above yield showers of milkand water for life and, covered in brilliant beauty, they drink up the waters as they come and touch the earth with their presence. 
2516 :Simple at heart, ignorant yet keen for knowledge, I ask with sincere mind and soul about these seven divine stages of the evolution of nature and life concealed in mystery, the sevenfold warp and woof of which, visionary sages have traced and described in detail for the children of light to see and know and realise. 
2517 :N ot knowing what I would know here, as a man of knowledge should know, I ask of the men of knowledge and poets of divine vision what that single principle or power could be in the form and nature of the one unborn and eternal Supreme which holds these six higher and lower spheres and atmospheres of the universe. 
2518 :the father, Supreme Spirit of the universe, and joins him with love and her innate power of motherhood. Then she receives the rain showers of the seeds of life, and the children of nature receive the form and food for life and the Word of knowledgefor the mind with reverence and worship. 
2519 :The mother, earth, is joined to the sun and held in orbit in circumambulation of the sun on its own axis. The productive power and the seed of life stays in the clouds within its atmosphere along with it in its motion in three orbits, i.e., on its own axis, round the sun and in the galaxy, and when it matures it roars and showers, looking at life of various colours and forms like a calf looking at the mother cow. 
2520 :The One Supreme Lord of the universe, who abides over all, sustains the three mothers, earth, sky and the heavens of light. He also sustains the three fathers, agni, vayu and A ditya, fire, wind the sun. These three couples tire him not, they smear him not. On the heights of that lord Prajapati's heaven, sages meditate on the voice of omniscience which is not within the reach of all. 
2521 :Five are the spokes in the wheel of time-cum- Prakrti, temporal existence of the physical world. (These are five elements of Prakrti: space, energy, heat, water and earth and their changes in time.) This wheel of Prakrti is ever on the move. In that wheel of time and physical change abide all the worlds of the universe, the axis of that wheel carries the immense burden of existence but it never gets heated. With its centre-hold, on this axis it has been going on and on since eternity and it will go on eternally, but it never wears away, it is never broken off. 
2522 :(The axis of the physio-temporal wheel is the constant substratum, original Prakrti, and the centre- hold is the Lord Supreme.) MWmd fqrTt ^le'vil^PH fcfeT 3n^: xfr 3T&f -qft Pm u i 1 h i 3T5sr£r 3T^r aiA PcMgruT 3 tt^ Father Time, they say has five stages from the momentonward uptoAyana and twelve divisions in the round of the year of time extending over existence in the farther half of the universe beyond the region of light. These others speak of this other half, visible in the light this side above, below the sun, which has six spokes of the seasons in the yearly round and moves in seven rounds of the wheels, wheel within wheel of time. 
2523 :The twelve-spoke wheel of time in existence that goes round and round the cosmic sun never ages. O Agni, light of humanity, the seven hundred and twenty children of nature, i.e., three hundred and sixty day- night pairs or seven hundred and twenty forms of material composition, remain till the end of chronological time. 
2524 :Existent with its centre and circumference, the unaging wheel, chariot, of the universe of physio- temporal character goes on and on, round and round. I n the expansive evolution of Prakrti, ten motive powers move it on, those ten being the pranic energies. The light of the sun suffused with Rajas, cosmic energy, goes on with the worlds. Indeed, all the worlds of existence abide vested in that light and energy. 
2525 :Women, though they are women, they say as I am told, they are men too for sure. The one that has eyes sees and knows this, but the blind does not see this, nor does he know. The man of poetic vision and wisdom, even though he be a son, not father, knows this well, and one who knows this hasan old head on young shoulders. 
2526 :Seven simultaneously born of one unborn, they call a Septet, that is, seven-in-one and one-in-seven. Six of them are 'Yamas', twin movers. They are Rshis, formative evolutioners, born of Devas, light and energy. Their properties and actions according to their place and character are created and ordained, and they, each in its form and character, move around for and in the unmoved mover. 
2527 :(These seven are the seven iokas: Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, Maha, Jana, Tapa, and Satyam. Sometimes the iokas are associated with Rshis, sometimes described as seven senses, and sometimes seven pranic energies. All these refer, in fact point to a theory of correspondencies existing at the physical, mental and spiritual levels, or at the level of matter, energy and thought and spirit. A nd this is a subject for high research and deep meditation.) Bearing her calf, the moon, the cow, the earth, by her own motion goes down with reference to that farther side, and goes up with reference to this nearer side in relation to the sun and stays up there stabilised in space in its own orbit. In what direction and to which remote region of space does she go beyond the half in the middle? What does she impel and energise and produce and how? Does she receive the consecration of the sun in the midst of a constellation or not? Here, who could be the man of poetic vision who would know this lower side of the earth with reference to that other higher side, and that higher side with reference to this lower side, and who further would know the father Sun, lord sustainer of the earth, and could say where from this brilliant and divine Deva- mind is born? (Deva-mind, yaksha-mind, prajnana, cheta, dhrti, universal, memory and vashikarana, all these levels, orders and modes of the mind are described in yajurveda 34, 1-6. Deva mind is the waking-mind which works with the senses, analyses the perceptions and helps the observer to come to conclusion. We may call it the scientific mind. Here, however, Deva mind may be interpreted in this particular, scientific, sense as well as in the comprehensive sense of all these taken together.) W hatever objects are near, they say, are far off, and the objects far off, they say, are close at hand. (All objects are on the move, and whether they are far or near is a matter of relativity. It is nothing absolute.) O Soma, lord of creative energy, whatever you and Indra, lord omnipotent of motive energy, have formed, as objects or as clusters of objects such as constellations of stars and galaxies, carry on the worlds of the universe as horses joined to the yoke and the pole draw the chariot for the M aster. 
2528 :Two birds, of beautiful wings, the individual soul and the Supreme Soul of the universe, both friends and companions, together nest on the same one Tree of existence. Of the two, one, the individual soul, eats the fruit with relish and enjoys as well as suffers the consequences. The other, the Supreme Soul, simply watches comprehensively all round, without eating anything. 
2529 :To that tree over and above the mortal world whereon the super-souls of beautiful wings of blessed action nestle in a state of consecration and taste the nectar honey of divine joy, whose taste of the fruit the ancients describe as super-sweet, to that tree of i mmortal taste and bliss they do not attain who do not know the Father. 
2530 :Where the blessed souls of noble action sing and celebrate their share of immortal joy in holy voice incessantly, therein, I pray, may the eternal constant imperishable Sovereign Ruler, protector and sustainer of the whole universe, initiate, inspire and bless me, the honest soul in preparation for the consecration. 
2531 :Those sages attain to that highest i mmortal state of imperishable bliss and freedom of M oksha who know and realise that divine power and protective presence which is celebrated in the Gayatri verses through the Gayatri metre. That presence is the Spirit which is distilled into the soul from Trishtup verses of the Veda and from the triple world of earth, middle regions and the heavens through knowledge, action and meditation. That same Spirit energises the j agati verses of the Veda and vibrates in the moving universe and that alone the moving universe too vibrates in living existence. 
2532 :(That highest state of Being, thatPada, is A urn, as stated in Kathopanishad, 1, 2,15 and Gita, 8,11-13.) With Gayatri metre, the Divine poet composes the Rks, Rgveda. With Rks, the Samans are composed. With Trishtubh, Vaka, Yajurveda is composed. By Vaka, further Vaka, Atharva-veda, is composed. A nd with two- pada, four-pada, constituents of the eternal word all the seven forms of metric composition of the Veda are formed. 
2533 :(Vedic language, scientifically, works at different corresponding levels: physical world, knowledge of the world of existence, and the language of knowledge. Here the creation of knowledge and language is described. 'Gayatra', for example, means scientific knwoledge (Yajurveda, 12, 4), protector of celebrants (Rgveda, 1, 164, 23), the earth (Kaushitaki Brahmana, 8, 9), agni (Shatapatha, 16,1,1,15) pranic energy (Taittiriya Brahmana (3, 3, 5, 3), and so on. 
2534 :In scientific terms of Veda, Gayatri is Parameshthi Prana, universal energy at the highest level. 
2535 :From universal energy, specific forms of energy are created. One of these specific forms is Rk, rhythmic energy operative in thought and consciousness. When pranic energy passes through a particular physical structure such as a reed or the larynx, sound is produced. When rhythm is added to sound, music is produced. When the segments of sound are related to particular points of the speech mechanism, phonemes, basic units of language, are formed. And when these elements of sound are joined and formed in correspondence with thought and awareness then language is created. W hen feeling and emotion is added to language and expressed, then song is created and composed. Thus from Rks, thought energies of consciousness composed in language joined to celebrative joy, the Samans are created. When the music of song and joy of consciousness are joined to practical situations in the holy business of living, then the Yajus are created as holy formulations of life's values. And then from thought, songs and practical formulae of holy living, the comprehensive body of Atharvans is created. The classification of Vedic knowledge is thus explained in terms of knowledge (Rgveda), song (Samaveda), Action (Yajurveda), and the comprehensive message of Atharva-veda which is also known as Brahma-veda. In this way, from the elements of divine energy, sound, thought, feeling and emotion specially love and joy, all language and linguistic composition, both divine and human, secular and sacred, are created and composed. 
2536 :For A urn and Gayatri, reference may be made to Mandukya Upanishad and Chhandogya Upanishad, 3,12.) The Lord establishes the ocean of energy in the region of light by cosmic dynamics and J agati hymns of Omnipotence. In the solar regions, over the middle regions of energy and on earth he establishes the sun, generative radiating source of light and energy, by the dynamics of Rathantara Samans. The blazing samits, orders of fire, cosmic energy, they say, are three: the sun in the regions of light, lightning, wind, and electricity in the middle regions, and fire and magnetic energy on the earth. And by His grand and adorable omnipotence, the Lord transcends them all. 
2537 :I invoke and call upon this generous mother Cow, M other Nature, M other Sarasvati of knowledge, the Vedic voice of divinity at the closest—only a perceptive, intelligent and dexterous person can distil the essence and power of her generosity. May Savita, theereator, thesun, theteacher, createthesoma of miIk, honey and the light of knowledge for us and bless us. Lit up and blazing is the fire in the vedi. The same, the Lowing and loving, this holy Cow, this Vedic Voice, this sustainer of breath and supports of life, caressing her children with a heart of tenderness comes to bless us all round. May she, never never to be killed or hurt, distil the milk of life's energy from the sun and wind and ever grow for the great good fortune and prosperity of life on earth. 
2538 :The holy Cow goes to the calf winking its eyes in loving expectation, lowing with love, and licks its head with caress. And lowing and loving more and more in response to the yearning affection of the calf, she overflows with the milk of life. (This same is the response of M other Earth and M other Sarasvati to her children yearning for love, nourishment and knowledge.) This isthat cloud, thethundervoiceof Divinity, which roars and by which, covered and surrounded in the vapours, the earth reverberates in response. The earth, with her own acts of kindness and generosity, sustains the mortal children of hers, and her generosity, being in sonance with light and lightning, reveals and realises her own form and character, and recedes into the cloud at the end. 
2539 :Living and breathing, moving at the speed of infinity yet constant, omnipresent, unmoved, the Spirit of the universe abides eternal, impelling the individual soul to move among the multitude of material forms. And thus the immortal spirit of mortal man moves around in love and company with the mortal forms of material beauty by virtue of its karma and yajnic service. 
2540 :Old age consumes even the youthful man of versatile action whom many fear to face, and flee in battle. Look at the inscrutable power of the Lord Divine by whose law of mutability the man alive yesterday is dead today, and the man who died yesterday is living today. 
2541 :The One that creates this universe, the other, the ordinary individual soul, knows not of. The man that sees the creator of the universe is off from the process of mortality. But the other that knows not, goes off from the world, and, enveloped in the mother's womb, covered in thefolds of materiality within, is born and enters the world of mortality for ages birth after birth. 
2542 :I have seen and realised that universal protector of the world of nature and of the mother powers of life who, ever infallible and immaculate, is immanent and active over the nearest paths of existence and, pervading the centrifugal and centripetal forces of Prakrti, eternally rolls around in the worlds of the universe. 
2543 :(Note: This mantra can be interpreted with reference to the individual soul which is infallible and immaculate in the essence but not so in the existential state.) The heaven above is our father and progenitor, our centre-hold, our haven and home here, our brother support to stand by. A nd this great earth, this nature, is our mother. I nto the womb of these two great expansive creative powers, the middle region between heaven and earth, the father places the seeds of life through rain on the planet earth. 
2544 :W hat is the highest ultimate end of the earth? I ask you. Where is the centre and centre-hold of the earth? I ask you. What is the life seed of the mighty generative force of P raj apati I shvara? I ask. What is the ultimate source and origin from where the first boom of the Word arises? I ask you. 
2545 :This vedi, yajnic creativity and productivity of the earth, is the ultimate end and symbol of the earth. The vitality of the sun and the shower of Soma is the life seed of the infinitely generous creator. This yajna, meeting of solar vitality and earthly productivity, is the centre hold of the world. And this Brahma, immanent divine consciousness of the Lord, is the ultimate home of the Word whence it incarnates in the world as Veda. 
2546 :I do not know for sure what I am like or what this world is. Self-imposed, self-bound, I move around limited by mind and understanding. But when the first evolutes of Rtam, cosmic law and knowledge, and the revelations of this divine Word of truth bless me then I would realise my share of the knowledge of the reality of existence as it is. 
2547 :The immortal soul, caught up in its own potential, goes back and forth coexistent with the mortal body. Both body and soul are eternal and eternally together, the body as Prakrti in the essence, and the soul as spirit. Both are different and going apart. Those who know, know one and the other, some know one but not the other, and those who do not know know neither. 
2548 :Seven evolutes of Prakrti, i.e., five elements and mind and senses (which evolve from Ahankara and M ahat-tattva) represent half of the divine process of creation, the other half being the creative seed or thought-sankalpa of Vishnu, Parameshthi Prajapati. By thewill ofVishnuthey bide by their functions and abide in the time-space continuum with their powers and properties, and they comprehend and rule the entire worlds of existence by the immanent will of the omniscient, omnipresent and omnipotent Vishnu. 
2549 :TheRks, Vedas, exist in the omniscient Supreme Spirit of existence, infinite and imperishable as the eternal and ultimate Space-time continuum. I n That all the divine powers of creation and existence subsist. If one does not know that what would he or she achieve by mere words of the Rks? Those who know and realise That, reside with That. 
2550 :Deconstructing, reconstructing and realising the reality content, 'artha' (Patanjali's yoga sutras, 3, 17), of the Rks, which is A urn, stage by stage through A, U, and M (M andukyopanishad, 9-11), the sages simulate and recreate for themselves the active presence of Brahma by analytical study of the Rks and experience the three-stage Brahma of universal nature immanent in the threefold world of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, over earth, firmament and the heavens, by which they know that all the four quarters of space vibrate with life. (Refer also to Shvetashvatara Upanishad, 1, 3 how the sages come to realise the immanent presence of Brahma vibrating in the world of Prakrti.) Adorable Voice of knowledge, vision and wisdom, begreatand illustrious with holy food for mind and soul and then, we pray, we too may have the honour and prosperity of knowledge and well being. Holy and inviolable as mother cow living on pure food and drinking pure water, and conducting yourself always with kindness and grace, bless us with the generous gift of knowledge and the joy of life. 
2551 :The Voice of Veda, knowledge and enlightenment, in spotless white light of the Word in the highest heaven of eternal omniscience, ever keen to reveal and grow, speaksloud and bold, stirring the still ness of space in waves of consciousness in the universal mind and in the pools of the seer's mind, and thus reveals the Word in forms and structures for humanity: One Veda as the knowledge, two Vedas as knowledge and action, three Vedas as knowledge, action and prayer, four Vedas as one compendium of discrete forms, eightfold knowledge of four Vedas and four Upa-Vedas of practical knowledge such as health science (Ayurveda), military science (Dhanurveda), etc., and nine stage knowledge, the nineth being grammar, phonetics, etc. Indeed, this is knowledge contained in countless thousand variations of the One imperishable Word AUM . This is the expansive evolution of the universe of one Prakrti and of the one Word, and from that O ne, fI ow out the oceanic streams of nature and the Word. 
2552 :Bright and beautiful rays of the sun, wearing vestments of vapour rise to the sun which holds the earth and its atmosphere. They turn round and down from the regions of water and flood the earth with showers of rain. 
2553 :before active humanity, so does Original Speech arise in creative wholeness without having been analysed into its formal constituents, with the stir of Prakrti by the DivineWill. O M itraand Varuna, sun and moon, teacher and disciple, which one of you knows of this wonder? And just as the sun itself, which is the embryo of the dawn, bears the burden of the dawn, so does Divine Omniscience, which itself is the content of that silent speech, bear the burden of that speech. And that will, knowledge and speech protects and promotes the truth and knowledge of Rtam, law and evolution of life, and wholly rejects untruth and negation. 
2554 :Viradvagvirat prthivi viradantariksam virat prajdpcitih. Viranmrtyuh sddhydndmadhirdjo babhuva tasyci bhutarh bhavyam vase sa me bhutam bhavyam vase krnotu. 
2555 :Virat, the Infinite, through self-will and immanence, in the course of Nature's evolution, became the Vak, universal speech. Virat is Prthivi, the earth. V i rat i s A ntari ksha, the middIe region. V i rat is Prajapati, universal father and guardian of the world of creation. Virat is death and involution. Virat became the supreme ruler of superior beings and of all that is possible and feasible. All that has been, all that is, and all that shall ever be is under the rule and law of Virat. May Virat give me the knowledge and competence to control my present, past and future. 
2556 :I have 'seen' that infinite omnipotent Being wrapped in mystery beyond the eye. I have it from far and near, boundless, dynamic, here, there, everywhere, yet far beyond this closest light of mundane reality. That mighty brave generous Spirit, the brave realise to their self-perfection, and what they do and the way they do are the first ordinances of noble living. 
2557 :Three powers of nature with their distinct identities express themselves and operate according to the cycle of the seasons in the year. One of these, the fire, procreates, i.e., helps in the sowing of the seeds and ripening of the crops. This is the fire-vitality of the earth. A nother, the sun, with its actions and operations, illuminates the world. The third is wind and electricity : its force can be perceived but not its form. 
2558 :There are four stages of the evolution of speech which Vak comprehends and which men of thought and higher vision know. Three of them are hidden in the cave, they move not, neither are they analysed. Only the fourth part, 'turiya', they speak in ordinary human communication. 
2559 :(Four constituents of the structure of language are: Nama or name-words of things, Akhyata or root words of verbs, Upasarga or affixes, and Nipata or accepted forms. These four, analysed this way, are subjects for the linguists and grammarians, not for the ordinary speaker. For the ordinary speaker, language is speech, just what it is and accepted without the understanding of structure and grammar. For such a person, it is behaviour purely at the social level and means what it does. 
2560 :But at the higher level, language is analysed into four layers of existence and consciousness: Para or language at the transcendental level beyond thought and imagination. It may be regarded as the language correspondence of God's omniscience. The second is Pashyanti, one step closer to us from Para. It may be understood as the language existing in the unconscious layers of the mind. Thethird is M adhyama, another step closer to our consciousness. It may be regarded as existing in our sub-conscious mind. And the fourth is Vaikhari, existing at the conscious level of the mind and operativein communication at the social level.This is the fourth part called 'turiya' in the mantra. This is analysed into Nama, Akhyata, Upasargaamd Nipata. 
2561 :Yet another way, language may be understood in Vedic terminology: I la, the language of omniscience, Sarasvati, the language of Veda, and Mahi, spoken language at the level of the earth, nation, region, family and the mother (Rgveda 1,13, 9). 
2562 :Reality isone,Truth isone, Ishvara, God, isOne and only One, not more than One. The noble and the wise speak of it in many ways. They call it Indra, glorious, Mitra, universal friend, Varuna, highest adorable, Agni, light of life, Suparna, supreme beauteous, Garutman, supreme dynamic. They say it is Agni, life and leader of existence, Yama, supreme controller, law and justice, and the judge, and M atarishva, supreme energy of the universe. 
2563 :Whatever plan or design or fraud or seductive decoy, planners, designers or tacticians have prepared with their own hand and brain, finished in all possible beautiful forms in detail and sent in to us like a bride ready for departure for the bridegroom's home, we counter and throw it back to the sender. (The evil plan is described like a vishakanya, deadly seductress.) Perfect in head, nose and ear, i.e., highly intelligent, perceptive, all receptive, made fully self- provided beauty of the world incarnate, this seductive decay we counter and throw off back to the sender. 
2564 :Whether she is created and adorned by the meanest of artists or a rul i ng Iord or the cleverest woman or the most ingenious intellectual, she must go back to her creator supporter like a woman rejected by her husband going back to her father or brother. 
2565 :With this antidote I have defiled and rendered ineffective all the evil and poison they have done to pollute your fields or infect your cows and your people. 
2566 :As imprecation returns to theimprecator, let evil too be for the evil doer and sin for the sin perpetrator. So we return the evil to the evil doer so that it may fall upon him. 
2567 :tactics of counter-action, counters the evil attacks of the evil doers. May he destroy those evil doers who have mounted the attack upon us. 
2568 :O force of attack, whoever stood up against us, fired you and ordered: "Go forward and attack", go back to the same. Try not to hurt us, we are innocent peace loving people. (This is not a magic mantra of avoiding or facing the enemy attack with mere chant of words. It i s the formula of i ntercepti on of the mi ssi Ie and sending it back upon the enemy just as a grenade-target soldier smartly picks up the unexploded grenade and throws it back upon the enemy.) O force of attack, go back to the expert maker who designed you and intelligently put your parts together to structure you. That is your real place. This target people is unknown to you and you are unknown to them. 
2569 :(This mantra may be interpreted as the preliminary response of a peace loving people to an impending danger of attack. If a nation is accepted as a nation of peace, an attack would be an act of O violent force, those artful people who created, hold and command you are evil doers, violators of the rule and law of peace. This culture of peace is our force, it turns back the force of viol ence the way it came. W ith that we lead you to cleanse yourself of artfulness, evil and violence. 
2570 :(This mantra suggests the resurgence of peace upon the forces of violence and tactical bullying. Secondly, it suggests that if peace fails initially, a peaceful nation should develop weapons like the Varunastra, Sammohanastra and Vayavyastra, as mentioned in ancient literature, which kill not and still turn back the enemy.) If I meet an unfortunate mother after her ritual bath on the death of her son (or husband) in war, I pray may all sin (of death and destruction) be absolved of me and may I have the money and power (to help and sustain the war torn). 
2571 :(These can be interpreted as the words of the ruler and the commander who has fought an inevitable war and realises his duty further to absolve himself of the sin and violence that war is, an evil, necessary or unnecessary. The victor must make amends for the loss the warriors suffer.) I f i n matters of gi vi ng for the service of parents, seniors and ancestors, or in matters of yajnic programmes of creativity, people mention your name with exception and reservation, then may these Oshadhis, men of love and light, absolve you of all that alleged want and sin. 
2572 :May these herbs with their essential properties, and men of love and light with divine wisdom, Vedic hymns, and the life giving nectar of the Rshis' words absolve you of the want and sin for and against the divinities of nature and humanity, parents, exceptional acts and accusations. 
2573 :Just as wind blows away dust from the earth and cloud from the sky, so does all sense of sin and guilt, evil and negativity fall off, driven away by Vedic wisdom and the light of Divinity, ultimate life and power. 
2574 :O sin and mischief of violence, get off from here like a braying she-donkey released from the bonds and, driven away through the power and force of divine vision and wisdom, go back to your master creators. 
2575 :O force of evil and violence, this is the path by which we throw you out and send you back from where you were directed against us. Broken and breaking, retreat and return like an army on the march back, with all transports, forms and formations, mounting an attack — now repelled. 
2576 :O force of sin and violence, the light for you is on the way back, noway forward, not hitherward. M ake way for yourself elsewhere other than us. Go back, go back another way, cross ninety difficult navigable streams, waste not yourself away. Go back. Stay not a moment. Do not destroy anything good and positive. 
2577 :O force of violence and evil, go back from here to where you come from, throw down and destroy the perpetrators of evil and violence by themselves as wind breaks down the trees. Spare not their cows, horses and men, and warn them that they will lose even their progeny for generations to come. 
2578 :Whatever evil, mischief or sabotage the clever people have done or hidden in your waters, cremation ground or fields or in your home stead, in the fire or in the yajnic hall towards you, even though you are pure and sinless, we counter and throw out even if they are stronger some way. 
2579 :Brought in, presented, confirmed, the deadly enemy, we have come to know as a camouflaged mischief and evil which is destructive. Let it go back from where it was brought, return there fast as a horse and destroy all the creations and products of the evil doers. 
2580 :O mischief, evil doer, there are swords of steel in our house. We also know how far the various stages of your infrastructure can go and achieve. Better get up and go back before your design is discovered. W hat do you wish to achieve here? O mischief, evil and sabotage, better be off at once. I will cutoff your head and your feet too. Indragni, commander and ruler with fi re power and electric forces, are our protectors and defenders of the people, they protect us. 
2581 :May the ruler, blissful as moon and inspiring as soma, give us peace and security. Let the masters of the physical elements, science and technology of power and energy afford us peace and protection. 
2582 :May B hava and Sharva, ruling powers of peace and progress, and destroyers of evil, injustice and mischief, focus their divine powers of peace, protection and justice upon the people, and strike their lazer beams of punishment upon evil doers, mischief makers and O two-wing, four-wing force of evil, mischief and negativity and calamitous versatility created and fully equipped by evil, if you came here at double or four-fold speed of the ordinary, now then rise to eightfold speed of the ordinary and go away far from here. 
2583 :O spirit of evil and mischief, adorned, anointed and beautifully prepared for departure, bearing all evil and mischief as your baggage, go far away, know and remember your creator, and go to him as a daughter to your own father. 
2584 :off, tarry not a moment, follow your own footsteps you came by as a hunter follows thefoot-marks of the hunted deer and reach your place of origin. Now you are the hunter and he, your creator, is the target deer. N ow you destroy him, he cannot destroy you. 
2585 :O ne who fi rst ai ms to shoot, the other, pre-empts and shoots down with the arrow. One who has first shot to kill, the other pre-empts and, in response, shoots and kills. 
2586 :O sin and violence in intention and action, better listen to this word of mine and go, go off from here to where you come from. Go to him that conceived, created and sent you hither. 
2587 :M urder of the innocents is heinous, O force of sin, evil and mischief. Do not hit, do not kill our cow, horse or person. W herever you be, covert in our midst, we discover and dislodge you from there. Be lighter than a dead leaf and fly away. 
2588 :Even if you stay and persist, covered in darkness, confusion or sheer ignorance, you are like a bird caught up in the net, since, having seized, exposed and disarmed all evils and mischiefs, weshootthem off back to the source creator. 
2589 :O force of action set against evil, sabotage and mischief, overt or covert, rise and destroy all supports and creations of the camouflaged evil doers and their designs acting for the forces of destruction and negativity. Spare them not, throw off and destroy all the evil doers. 
2590 :(This force of action could be the same original evil force converted and redirected to destroy its own creators, or a force newly raised by the Defence to fight against evil and violence and its creator.) As the sun rises free from darkness and surpasses the night and lights of the dawn, so do I overcome and destroy all evils, action and acts of the perpetrators of evil and shake off all sin and calamity like an elephant shaking off dust. 
2591 :Like Kenopanishad, this Sukta begins with the interrogative ‘Kena, By whom': What is the cause? The Sukta explores the cause of human existence at the individual, social and spiritual level. The first eight mantras explore the cause of the formation of the human body: W ho designed, shaped, finished and juxtaposed the heels of man (i.e., the human being)? Who formed the flesh? Who the ankles? By whom were the beautiful nimble fingers formed? By whom the soles of feet? And who brought about the balance at the centre of gravity? From what and for what reason did the makers form the lower ankles and upper knees of man? W hence, why and where did they design and form the two thighs and the joints of knees separately and together in balance? Who thought and designed that? The four, two knees and two thighs, at the end of the joint above the thighs are joined to the four-part flexible trunk of the body. W ho created the hips and the thighs with which the trunk is joined as it is so strong? H ow many and which ones are those divinities that structured and shaped man's chest and neck? H ow many of them formed and fixed the breasts? Who the two elbows, how many the shoulders, and how many structured and formed the ribs? W ho collected the materials and formed the two arms of this man so that he could do heroic deeds? And which divinity was thatwho fixed the two shoulders on his body? W ho broke open the seven apertures of senses in his head: these two ears, two nostrils, two eyes and one mouth, by virtue of whose great power and faculty men as well as animals go their own ways in their daily business? Answer to questions from mantras 1 to 6: Kah, the Lord Supreme. In fact, the answer is inbuilt in each mantra itself. Reason? 'Kah' means both 'who' and 'Lord Supreme'. 
2592 :W ho placed the versatile tongue in the midst of two jaws and then vested the great speech thereon? Wearing the vestments of Prakrti, He pervades and rolls around in the worlds of existence. Who knows that? Who is that Deva, divine power and presence, first among all, which, having collected all that was to be collected, this man's brain, forehead, back-head and skull, supported and placed all together in proper order onthetwojawsand roseupto thehigh heavensof light, transcendent? W hence, from whom, the many things pleasant and unpleasant, sleep and dream, oppression, depression and weariness, pleasures and joys, which the brilliant humanity bears as a burden, the bitter-sweet of life? Whence, for what reason in man, pain, poverty, calamity, stupidity? Whence and for what reason, accomplishment and achievement, prosperity, struggle and success against adversity, intelligence and wisdom, rise and progress? Who created and placed in humanity the waters, blood and other liquids, produced within, flowing and circulating in streams all round in abundance, intense, ruddy, dark red, copper red, turbid, upwards, downwards, transverse, in a circuit? Who vested in this human being form, name, fame, motion and progress? Who in-vested eminence and identity, and all the varieties of character, action and behaviour in man? Who spins and weaves the warp and woof of prana and apana energies of breath in circulation in the human body system? W ho interweaves the vyana energy all over the system and establishes the samana vitality to maintain the systemic metabolism in man? Who is that Divinity? Who is the one divine that vests the spirit of yajna and self-sacrifice in man? Who vests truth, and untruth? Whence death? Whence immortality? W ho brought in and gave man the vestment of body? W ho fashions his health and life span? W ho gives him strength and courage? Who creates and gives him impulse and enthusiasm for speed and progress? By whom were the oceans of water created and expanded? Who created the day for light? By whom was the dawn lighted? By whom the fact of evening was created? A nswer: K ah. 
2593 :Who created and vested in man, in fact in this entire cosmos, theseed-vitality of life so that the threadline of life be continued? Who brought and vested intelligence into man? Who vested speech, who gave the faculty to move and dance in ecstasy? Answer: Kah. 
2594 :Who covered this earth with atmosphere and greenery? Who vests and covers the heaven of light? By which power and grandeur does the Supreme Purusha vest the clouds and mountainswith glory? How does the Purusha initiate and order the acts of existence such as creation, evolution and involution? By which mysterious power does the Purusha pervade the cloud? By which does he illuminate the bright moon? By which power and presence does he bless and energise the yajna, faith in truth, life and divinity, and by which secret power does he enliven the mind so deep from conscious surface to the bottomless unconscious? By what reason does Purusha bless the man dedicated to Shruti, Veda? Forwhat reason does he bless the man dedicated to the Supreme transcendent? For what reason does he light this fire? By what does he Brahma blesses the man of the Veda for his knowledge and vision. Brahma blesses this man of supreme Divinity for his faith and communion. The Supreme Purusha lights this fire for the purpose of yajna. And Brahma forms and comprehends cosmic time by immanence and transcendence. 
2595 :By which mystery does the Purusha pervadethe divine powers of existence? By which mystery, the people, children of divinity? Whereby is the Order cal led real, and this other, no-order? divine powers of nature with its immanence and knowledge. Purusha blesses the children of divinity by virtue of faith and immanence. The order is called real by virtue of the Presence in consciousness, and the other is no-order because of no-presence in the consciousness. 
2596 :By whom is this earth held in order below? By whom is the heaven of light held up in order on high? By whom is this vast middle region held up high and across in space? By Brahma is the earth held below. By Brahma is the heaven of light held up high. By Brahma is the vast middle region held up high and across. 
2597 :Atharva, the Lord beyond all motion, having integrated the head and heart of man together, thus purifying and sanctifying the personality, transcends both thought and emotion. 
2598 :N ote: This is one interpretation of the mantra if Atharva is interpreted as Brahma. But the mantra can be interpreted from the human point of view also, in which case Atharva should be interpreted as the yogi who has achieved thestateof'Chitta-vrtti-nirodha', i.e., the state of peace of mind beyond fluctuations: Atharva, the yogi in a state of tranquillity, having integrated thought and emotion together, in a state of purity of head, heart and the spirit should transcend Vitarka and Vichara samadhi through the trans- imaginative faculty of the spirit in concentration on the sahasrara chakra on top of the head and brain. 
2599 :That head, i.e., state of the mind and soul of the yogi, is the treasure seat of divinities perfectly and wholly suffused in the divine presence, and that state thus raised, prana, pure food and peace of mind, all protect and preserve in the state of peace beyond disturbance. 
2600 :Pervasive all above, pervasive all around, pervasive all over quarters of space, pervasive all through the personality, thus becomes the state of divine Purusha for the yogi, and thus becomes his own state also. One who knows thus the City of immanent God, for him for this reason, Brahma is called Cosmic Purusha, and man is called microcosmic Purusha. 
2601 :Whoever thus knows the City of God wrapped in nectar, ecstasy and immortality, for him Brahma and all things divineyield and award the eye of clairvoyance, pranic energy and noble progeny for continuance. 
2602 :The eye of clairvoyance forsakes him not, nor pranic energy and vitality forsakes him, before the completion of full age. Who knows the body as the City of God, for that very reason he knows that the soul is called 'purusha', resident of the City of God. 
2603 :The human body isan invinciblecity of the gods, God Supreme and the divinities of nature. It has eight chakras: Muladhara, Svadhishthana, M anipur, Anahat, Vishuddhi, Lalana,Ajnaand Sahasrara. It has nine gates: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, mouth and the organs of excretion. In the city, there is a golden cave, replete with the golden light of Divinity, which is the paradisal path to heaven. This City is Ayodhya, the Invincible. 
2604 :I n that golden cave of light, three spoked like a wheel and three pillared like a dome, there is a Yaksha, mysterious Divine Being, with the soul which they alone know who know the Brahma. 
2605 :That golden city, Invincible Ayodhya, refulgent redeemer wrapped in glory, unconquered and unassailable by any foreigner, Brahma Supreme has entered, and there abides for those who know and can see. 
2606 :Note: The golden heart cave of the last three mantras of this sukta is a micro-version of the macro- cosmic Trinity of Brahma, J iva and Prakrti, which can be realised by men of knowledge and vision. This treasure-hold of Trinity is dynamic as a wheel, with three spokes, and firm as a dome on three pillars. The three spokes of the wheel are Satva, Rajas and Tamas modes of Prakrti, and the three pillars of the Dome are Prakrti, jiva and Brahma. In this context reference may also made to Shvetashvataropanishad, 1, 3-7, and 4, 5-7. With reference to the mysterious Yaksha of mantra 32, refer to Kenopanishad part 3 and 4,1-3. 
2607 :The theme of this sukta is Varanamani, 'choice jewel' to keep off, prohibit, ward off and fight out enemies. 
2608 :Varana is a rampart, also called 'Varuna' and 4 Setu' and this also implies water and bridge, something like a moat crossable by a draw-bridge. 
2609 :Mani is a jewel, ornament, amulet, globule, crystal, also a magnet, lodestone. 
2610 :The choice of interpretation of Varana-mani then is between: (a) an amulet, a magical formula, to ward off and fight out the adversaries, if possible in a scientific age; (c) a combination of 'a' and 'b': a strategy and technique of defence with the right choice of the commander, personnel, weapons and tactics which can give wonderful results against the enemies. 
2611 :This is my jewel choice of defence, the right commander and strategist, destroyer of enemies, strong, virile, and producer of wondrous results. With this you engage the enemies, destroy them all who have launched the attack. 
2612 :Crush these enemies, destroy them, engagethem at once. Let this leading power advance up front. With this technique and strategy, noble people have been fighting out the onslaughts of destructive forces time and again. 
2613 :(Varana-mani is also a herbal medicine prepared from the Varuna tree.) This jewel of a herbal medicine from the Varuna tree is a panacea, a general tonic against all diseases, efficacious in a thousand ways, fresh and golden bright. It casts down your enemies, deadly diseases. Be first to use it in advance as a preventive and keep off all those ailments which are afflictive and consumptive. 
2614 :(Metaphorically the disease may also be interpreted as probable enemies lurking around and waiting, against which preventive measures are required.) This Varana would protect you against all evil designs and fears caused by human enemies rising and spreading around. It will also safeguard you from sin and evil which you or others might also commit out of fear and panic of supposed dangers. 
2615 :This Varana-mani of masterly character is divine, a protective against danger and disease. The cancerous consumption that has entered, infects and affIicts this patient (person or people), noble specialists If having slept you dream something evil and sinful, or if a surreptitious enemy stealthily prowls around by uncommon ways, or from the voice of the piotti ng enemy you hear something eviI and foreboding, this Varana-mani will protect you against all that. 
2616 :Varana will protect you from want, adversity, malevolence and betrayal, fear and the fatal strike of deadly enemy, even from untimely death. 
2617 :W hatever sin, evil or contagion my mother, my father, my brothers, all my own people, we all, have done or caused, this divine vanaspati, this herb, this master of the common wealth of the nation, will save us and absolve us of that and its consequences. 
2618 :Let my adversaries along with their kin, distressed and broken by Varana, gone already to unknown regions of dust, fall further to the lowest dark of darkness. 
2619 :U nhurt and secure I am, moving on along paths of peace and security, blest with health and age, family and friends. Let this Varana-mani protect and promote me step by step all round in all directions. 
2620 :May this divine refulgent Varana-mani, Vanaspati, lord of light and nature reigning in the heart and soul ward off my enemies like Indra throwing off the wicked and demonic powers of nature and humanity. 
2621 :Blest with health and age for a full life of hundred years, I wear and bear with Varana-mani. May it sustain and promote my nation, the social order, national wealth and our power and honour. 
2622 :Just as the wind breaks down the trees by its stormy force so, O Vanaspati, lord of the common wealth, break down my enemies whether they are traditional or newly arisen. O Ruler, may Varuna, commander of the defence and law and order forces, protect you from external and internal dangers. 
2623 :Just as wind and fire break down and devour trees of the forest, so O Ruler of the commonwealth, crush my enemies whether they are old or newly arisen. 
2624 :A nd may Varana, commander of the forces of law and defence, guard you against external and internal dangers. 
2625 :Just as trees bent and broken by the wind lie low on the ground, so O Ruler of the commonwealth, bend and break my enemies whether old or newly arisen, and may Varana, commander of the forces of law and defence, guard you against external and internal dangers. 
2626 :O Varana, Guardian of the commonwealth, crush all those antisocial forces before their full age, before they are destined to die by natural death, who damage his wealth of the nation and who are sabotagers of the social order. 
2627 :j ust as the sun shines exceedingly, as refulgence of light is concentrated into it, so may this Varana-mani give me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify me with light and lustre, may it bless me with glory and grandeur. 
2628 :A s there is beauty in the moon and splendour in the all-watching sun, so may this Varana-mani give me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify me with light and lustre, may it bless me with glory and grandeur. 
2629 :A s there is honour and glory in the earth and in this all-vitalising fire, so may this Varana-mani give me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify me with light and lustre, may it bring me the grace of glory and grandeur. 
2630 :As there is beauty of modesty and honour of grace in the maiden and grandeur in this luxurious chariot, so may thisVarana-mani give me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify mewith light and lustre and anointmewith grace and glory. 
2631 :As there is honour in the drink of soma and delicious delicacy of taste and social prestige in 'madhu- parka', so may thisVarana-mani give me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify mewith light and lustre and anointmewith grace and glory. 
2632 :As there is honour in Agnihotra and piety and prestige in the offer of homage and hospitality to divine seniors and holy men, so may this Varana-mani bring me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify me with light and lustre and anoint me with grace and glory. 
2633 :As there is honour in the Yajamana and it is in thisyajna concentrated, so may this Varana-mani bring me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify me with light and lustre and anoint me with grace and glory. 
2634 :As there is grandeur and glory in Prajapati, guardian of humanity, and as it is in the Lord Supreme, so may this Varana-mani bring me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. 
2635 :May it beatify me with light and lustre and anoint me with grace and glory. 
2636 :As there is nectar and immortality in the divinities, and Truth is concentrated in these divinities, so may this Varana-mani bring me honour, fame and abundance of prosperity and good fortune. May it beatify mewith light and lustre and anointmewith grace and glory. 
2637 :The chariot speed of Indra's, i.e., the speed of el ectricity (i n the treatment of snake poi son) is fi rst and fastest, that of Deva's, other powers of nature (such as clay, heat, etc.) is next, and that of Varuna's, water treatment, isthird. The ratha, speed of poison, of snakes is low. It comes to a stop as against a pillar and goes out. 
2638 :Darbha herb, burning ember, Tarunaka herb, these are anti dotes to 'aghashva's and parusha's poison, they are, like the nave, strong aids to the cure of poison. 
2639 :O Shveta herb, with the first and last part of the root, let the flow of dangerous poison be ineffective like sapless wood floating on water. 
2640 :Aranghusha herb, having gone deep into the system and oozed out, shows aloud that the dangerous poison has become ineffectual likesapless wood floating on water. 
2641 :Paidva kills the kasarnila snake. Paidva kills the white and dark black snake. Paidva crushes the head of Ratharvi and Prdakvi snakes. 
2642 :O Paidva, go in advance and we would follow you. Throw off the snakes from the paths by which we go on the business of life. 
2643 :This is Paidva, born and arisen, this is the path it has gone by. These are the foot-marks of the powerful snake killer A rvan. 
2644 :Let it not open the mouth that is closed, nor close the mouth that is open. I n this field there are two snakes, one male, the other female, both poisonless. 
2645 :Let the snakes which are near here and those that are far away be poisonless. I kill the scorpion with a club and the snake with a stick as it comes up. 
2646 :This is the antidote to both Aghashva and svaja snakes. Indra, electricity has killed the snakethat would have poisoned me and the Paidva has destroyed the others. 
2647 :We recognise and value the presence of Paidva, Ashvagandha or Karnika plant, which is steady and stable i n pi ace. Because of this, these poisonous snakes, deadly and raging, stay back. 
2648 :(Paidva has also been interpreted as the mongoose which fights and kills snakes.) Void of breath, void of poison, the snakes have been destroyed by Indra with the 'vajra', thunderous blow of lightning power. Indra has killed them, we have killed them. 
2649 :Killed are the snakes with stripes, crushed are the poisonous ones. O Paidva, O Indra, kill the Darvi that spreads its hood, the white one and the black hiding in the grasses. 
2650 :That sylvan maiden of the kirata tribe digs up the herbs, white cure of snake poison, on top of the hills with tools of steel. 
2651 :(Kairatika and kumarika have also been interpreted as herbs for the cure of snake poison.) Look, there comes the young physician, the tireless man, destroyer of various snakes. He is the destroyer of Svaja snakes as well as of scorpions. 
2652 :Indra, lightning and electric energy, M itra, the sun, Varuna, water, wind and cloud, these have cast away and destroyed the snakes for my protection. 
2653 :For my protection, Indra has destroyed the Prdaku, deadly snake, both male and female, the Svaja, theTirashchiraji, and Dashonasi. 
2654 :O snake, Indra first destroyed your progenitor. Once your progenitors are destroyed, what poison can now be surviving? I have caught on the heads of snakes as a fisherman does his job, and, having gone to the deep middle of the river, I have washed away the poison of the snakes. 
2655 :Let the rivers wash and carry away the poison of alI snakes. Thus theTirashchi raj is, snakes with stri pes across, are killed, Prdakus, snakes with deadly poison, are crushed. 
2656 :Of the herbal medications, I carefully choose such as may be the freshest and most effective, and use those as are most efficacious against the poison. O snake, let the poison now go out. 
2657 :W hatever poison there is in fire, in the sun, and whatever there is in earth and in herbs and trees, whatever poison there is in tubers and in specially poisonous herbs, O snake, (all that you have collected from these) let it go out. 
2658 :M any and great are the species of snakes, those that are born in hot regions and carry burning poison, those born and living in herbs and trees, those that are born and live in waters, and those which are stunning poisonous and strike as lightning. All these snakes we deal with as they deserve. 
2659 :Taudi is your name, or Ghrtachi, or your name is Kanya as well. I take the lowest part of your root from the deepest i n earth for that part i s most efficacious against snake poison. 
2660 :O Taudi, remove the poison from every part of the body, cleanse the heart free of poison. O patient, let the intensity of poison go down and out of your body. 
2661 :Arrested, the poison is off, far out, neutralised as poison is mixed in poison (of the antidote). Agni, fire of the antidote, has taken out the poison. Soma has taken it out. The poison is gone back to the biter snake. The snake is dead. 
2662 :O people, you are the honour and splendour of the order and ruler of the human nation, you are the power and patience of the ruler, you are the strength and force of the ruler, you are the vigour and valour of I commit you to the achievement of united victory with dedication to knowledge and vision and cooperation of the intellectuals, teachers and researchers. 
2663 :You are the honour and splendour of the human order and theSamrat, supreme ruler. You are the power and patience of the nati on, you are the strength and force of the samrat, you are the vigour and valour of the ruler, you are the real manly wealth of the order. I commit you to the achievement of united victory with dedication to discipline, defence and honour of the order and cooperation of the forces of law and order. 
2664 :You are the honour and splendour of the order and the ruler, you are the power and patience of the nation, you are the strength and force of the ruler, you are the vigour and valour of the ruler, you are the real manly wealth of the order. I commit you to the achievement of united victory with dedication to the honour and conscience of Indra, spirit of the nation, You are the honour and splendour of the order, you are the power and patience of the nation, you are the strength and force of the Samrat, you are the vigour and valour of the ruler, you are the real manly wealth of the nation. I commit you to the achievement of united victory with dedication to the peace and progress of the nation and cooperation of the forces of peace and good will. 
2665 :You are the honour and splendour of the order, you are the power and patience of the nation, you are the strength and force of the Samrat, you are the vigour and valour of the ruler, you are the real manly wealth of the nation. I commit you to the achievement of united victory with dedication to action and advancement of the nation and cooperation of the common people. 
2666 :You are the honour and splendour of the order, you are the power and patience of the nation, you are the power and patience of the nation, you are the strength and force of the Samrat, you are the vigour and valour of the government, you are the real manly wealth of the nation. For the achievement of united victory and advancement, let all physical, material and living forces abide closely by me, the Ruler. Let all the united people and the united actions be together dedicated to the O rder of humanity. 
2667 :O noble people of divine humanity, you are part and partners of Agni, leading lights of the nation. Like the purity and energy of waters, you hold in you the spirit and essence of noble action. Bring in and vest in us the purity, power and splendour of noble action for the nation. With the rule and law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and dedicate you to the welfare of this nation. 
2668 :O noble people of divine humanity, you are part and partners of Indra, ruling powers of the nation. Like the energy and purity of waters, you hold in you the spirit and essence of noble action. Bring in and vest in us the purity, power and splendour of noble action for the nation. With the rule and law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and consecrate you to the welfare of this nation. 
2669 :O noble people of divine humanity, you are part and partners of Soma, beauty and grace of life like the moon. Like the purity and peace of waters, you hold in you the spirit and essence of noble action. Bring in and vest in us the purity, power and splendour of nobleaction for the nation. With the rule and law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and consecrate you to the welfare of this nation. 
2670 :O noble people of divine action, you are part and partners of Varuna, regional orders of the world. Like the purity and fluidity of waters, you hold in you the spirit and essence of noble action. B ring us the purity, power and splendour of noble action for the nation. With the rule and law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and consecrate you to the life and advancement of this nation. 
2671 :O noble people of the world, you are part and partners of M itra and Varuna, divine love, wisdom and pranic energies of nature. Like the purity and power of the universal flow of love and energy, you hold in you the spi rit and essence of noble acti on. B ring us the purity, power and splendour of noble action with love and wisdom forthenation. With theruleand law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and consecrate you to the life and happiness of this human nation. 
2672 :O noble children of the earth, you are part and partners of Yama, universal law and justice. Like the purity and power of the dynamics of divine law in action, you hold in you the spirit and essence of noble action with love and justice. Bring us the purity, power and splendour of noble action in the spirit of justice. With the rule and law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and consecrate you to the life and happiness of this world. 
2673 :You are part and partners of the Pitaras, ancestors, seniors, and the rulers and organisers of the human community. Like the purity and power of social dynamics in action and progressive flow, you hold in you the spirit and essence of noble action towards your goals. Bring us the purity, power and splendour of noble action for the progress of humanity. With the rule and law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and consecrate you to the rule and order of this human nation. 
2674 :You are part and partners of Savita, divine father giver of life and light with the inspiration to live and shine. Likethe purity and power of the radiation of light you hold in you the spirit and essence of noble action. Bring us the purity, power and splendour of creative and enlightened action. With the rule and law of Prajapati and with the holiness of his glory, I assign and consecrate you to the enlightenment, harmony and unity of this human nation as one family of one universal father Savita. 
2675 :O people, whatever is your Bhaga, share of the powers and obligations of state affairs in the business of governance and administration, loved by society and respected by the wise for its value, here I grant and entrust to you. Do not forsake that, nor must I neglect that, and thereby we take on whoever hates us and whoever we disapprove, and with this knowledge, through this process of law, and with this act of justice, we counter, cover and eliminate that element of hate and enmity. 
2676 :O people of the state, whoever of the people is most dynamic in the business of governance and administration of the order, loved by society and respected by the wise for his dynamism, here I appoint, and entrust the department to him. Do not forsake him, nor must I neglect him, and thereby we take on whoever hates us and whoever we disapprove, and with this knowledge, through this process of law, and with this act of justice, we counter, cover and eliminate that element of hate and enmity. 
2677 :O people of the state, whoever is the dearest favourite of the people, loved by society and respected by the wise in the business of governance and administration of the order, here I appoint, and entrust the department to him. Do not forsake him, nor would I neglect him, and thereby we take on whoever hates us and whoever we disapprove, and with this knowledge, through this process of law, and with this act of justice, we counter, cover and eliminate that element of hate and enmity. 
2678 :O people of the state, whoever is the strongest and most generous of the people, loved by society and respected by the w i se i n the business of governance and administration of the order, here I appoint, and entrust the department to him. Do notforsake him, nor would I neglect him, and thereby we take on whoever hates us and whoever we disapprove, and with this knowledge, through this process of law, and with this act of justice, we counter, cover and eliminate that element of hate and enmity. 
2679 :O people of the state, whoever of the people is at heart the deepest treasure of the golden virtues of humanity in the business of governance and administration of the order, loved by society and respected by the wise for his virtues, here I appoint, and entrust the department to him. Do not forsake him, nor must I forsake or neglect him, and thereby we take on whoever hates us and whoever we disapprove, and with this knowledge, through this process of law, and with this act of justice, we counter, cover and eliminate that element of hate and enmity. 
2680 :O people of the land, whoever of you among the people i s f i rm as adamant, versati I e as the f i rmament, and brilliant, loved by the people and respected by the wise in the business of governance and administration of the order, hereby I appoint,, and entrust the department to him. Do not forsake him nor must I forsake or neglect him, and thereby we take on whoever hates us and whoever we disapprove, and with this knowledge, through this process of law, and with this act of justice, we counter, cover and eliminate that element of hate and enmity. 
2681 :O people of the land, whoever of you among the people are brilliant as light, instant and passionate in action as fire, loved by society and respected by the wise in the business of governance and administration of the order, hereby I appoint, and entrust the order to them. Do not forsake them, nor must I forsake and neglect them, and thereby we take on whoever hates us and whoever we disapprove, and with this knowledge, through this process of law, and with this act of justice, we counter, cover and eliminate that element of hate and enmity. 
2682 :last three years, this side lower and other than of knowledge, karma and worship, thetrio of noble action, in the service of Lord Supreme, may the sages excuse and the Lord guard and save us from ail that sin and evil. 
2683 :O sages, O mind and senses, O karmas of this life of existence, I impel and inspire you to move with all your vigour, unhurt, unscathed, to your own original divine source, the Infinite sea. Let there be no pain, no suffering to hurt us. 
2684 :Let the waters of nature and sages of humanity, free from sin and defilement, noble and beautiful of aspect, wash off all sin and evil from us, cast away all dirt and evil dreams from us. 
2685 :O man, you are Vishnu's own power and projection, subduer of challenging negativities, nourished, strengthened, honed, perfected, magnetised by the earth and blest with the fire of Agni. 
2686 :I strive and advance over the earth. We strike out that negativity from the earth which hates us and which we hate. That adversary must not survive. Let even life energy forsake that. 
2687 :You are the stride, projection and power of Vishnu, subduer of adversaries, strengthened, honed and sharpened by the firmament, blest with the force of thunder and lightning. 
2688 :I strive and advance across the firmament. We strike out that negativity from the firmament which negates us and which we hate. That negativity must not survive. Let even life energy forsake that. 
2689 :You are Vishnu's stride of the power and projection of his light, subduer of adversaries, strengthened, honed and illuminated by the light of heaven, blest with the refulgence of the sun. 
2690 :I strive and advance in conformity with the radiation of heavenly light. We strike out those negativities from the light-sphere of life which negate us and which we hate. Negativity and negation must not survive and thrive. Let even life energy forsake that. 
2691 :You are Vishnu's stride of power and presence, subduer of adversaries, strengthened, honed and perfected by space, blest with the refulgence of cosmic mind. 
2692 :boundlessness of space. We strike out those restrictions and negativities from our life space and mind which restrict us and which we reject. C loseness and negativity must not survive to thrive. Let even life energy forsake that negativity and negation. 
2693 :You are Vishnu's stride of power, presence and force, subduer of adversaries, strengthened, honed and sharpened by definite direction of action, blest with the force of wind shears. 
2694 :I strive and advance in the definite direction of our goal. We strike out those adversaries and hurdles which obstruct us on way and which we hate and reject. Hurdles and adversaries must not survive, much less thrive. Let even life energy forsake the negativities. (5) physicality), destroyer of adversaries and adversities, strengthened, seasoned and inspired by Rks and blest with the energy and ecstasy of Samans. 
2695 :I strive and advance in pursuance of the Rks. We strike out those adversaries from our way of the Rks which hate and obstruct us and which we hate and reject. Hate and adversaries must not survive, northrive. Let even life energy forsake hate and adversity. 
2696 :You are the stride of Vishnu (into the realm of cosmic yaj na), destroyer of adversari es and negati viti es. You are strengthened, seasoned and liberalised by yajna, and blest with the glory and splendour of B rahma. 
2697 :I strive and advance in life by the way of yajna. We remove those adversaries and negativities from the way of yajna by yajna who hate and obstruct us and whom we hate and reject. Hate and adversaries must not survive, northrive. Let even life energy forsake hate and enmity. 
2698 :You are the stride and pervasion of Vishnu (into biological life), you are destroyer of adversaries. You are nourished, strengthened and vitalised by herbs, blest with the spirit and ecstatic life of soma. 
2699 :I strive and advance in life like the growth of herbs and trees and their vitality. We remove those adversaries and negativities from oshadhis by oshadhis which obstruct and negate us and which we too hate and oppose. Hate and negativities must not live, nor thrive, let even life energy forsake them. 
2700 :You are Vishnu's stride (into the dynamics of life), seasoned and sharpened for action as destroyer of adversaries, and blest with the splendour of cosmic waters and justice. 
2701 :I strive and advance into life in pursuance of action, justice and generosity. We remove alI adversaries and negatives from our paths of action by positive action. We fight out those that hate and obstruct us and those we hate and reject for their negativity. Let not hate and enmity survive and live on. Let even life energy forsake all hate and enmity. 
2702 :You are the stride of Vishnu into productivity, destroyer of adversaries, strengthened, raised and sharpened by the abundance of farming, and blest with the vigour and vitality of food. 
2703 :I strive and advance into life in pursuance of the plenty and generosity of food and farming. From the way of food and farming we remove al I those factors and negativities which oppose and obstruct us and those which we oppose and reject. Let no negativity and obstruction survive and last. Let even life energy forsake the negativity and obstruction of hate and enmity. 
2704 :destroyer of adversaries, strengthened and sharpened by the living energy of prana, blest by the splendour of Purusha, living spirit of the universe. 
2705 :I strive and advance in pursuance of prana. We remove from the way of vibrant living all those negativities which oppose and obstruct us and which we hate and reject. Let not such opposition to pranic progress survive and thrive. Let even life energy forsake such negativity, hate and enmity. 
2706 :Whatever is won is ours, secured. Whatever is discovered, uncovered, created is ours, secured. All enemies, all adversities, I have stemmed and stilled. H ereby I secure the life, energy, Iustre and spl endour of the scion of such and such family and the son of such and such mother. Hereby I cast down this enemy and adversity of this land and its people. 
2707 :I follow the course of life in accordance with the course of the sun on the right, in Dakshinayana. May that course of progress give me strength and wealth of honour and glory of Brahmanic splendour of peace. 
2708 :I turn and advance in the directions of light and enlightenment. May these give me strength and wealth of honour and glory of the Brahmanic order of peace and splendour. 
2709 :I follow the course of the seven sages. May they give me strength and wealth of honour and glory of the Brahmanic order of peace and enlightenment. 
2710 :and shown by Veda. May it give me strength and wealth of honour and glory of the Brahmanic order of peace and enlightenment. 
2711 :I follow the course of life shown by Brahmanas, sages of knowledge and enlightenment. May they give me wealth and glory of the Brahmanic order of honour and enlightenment. 
2712 :W hatever evil we hunt out, we deal with by the force of law, refer it to the Lord Supreme's law of dispensation and dispose of by the law of Dharma, i.e., the law of the constitution. 
2713 :rules of order for peace and punishment, and let this action of law and administration deal with itasthedivine blaze of vedi fire accepts an oblation. 
2714 :You are subject to the law of the ruler Varuna, i.e., laws of the land subsisting within the laws of N ature and Divinity. O powers of law and order, take this man, son of such and such family and son of such and such mother, subject to his right to life and maintenance in the law. 
2715 :O lord of the land, ruler and protector of the people, whatever laws of food and means of maintenance obtain in the land according to conditions of the earth for you and the people, O Prajapati, give us our share of that. 
2716 :of life. Let us be regaled with nectar to satiety. Hey Agni, I have come with the offer of milky oblations. Pray bless me with the divine lustre and splendour of life. 
2717 :HeyAgni, bless mewith honour and lustre, bless me with progeny, with good health and full age. Let the divines know of me thus, let Indra know of me along with the holy sages. 
2718 :HeyAgni, now whatever wedded couples swear at each other, what rude word wastours utter in quarrel, whatever painful words are uttered by them out of angry mind, with that very affliction strike these hurtful people through the heart. (Let them realise what pain is.) HeyAgni, with your heat, shatter the evil doers. With power and passion, crush the demons. With your flames, burn off the fools and wastours. Scorching the ogres, throw them out. 
2719 :I, Agni, the ruler and enlightened leader, strike the four-edged thunderbolt of lightning upon this ogre to break his head. May this strike break his body and net-work into bits. And let all devas, enlightened people of the land, know, recognise and approve of this act of justice. 
2720 :The theme of this hymn is 'M ani-bandhana', tying and wearing 'the jewel'- an amulet, charm or magic? No. The jewel is something real but at the same time wonderful. It is something by which you punish theuncreative, unproductive evader of social obligations with your own lustre and power. It is born of ploughshare made of khadira wood by the carpenter. It is given by Brhaspati and worn by Indra, Soma, Chandrama, Savita and Apah. The recipients create and achieve wonderful things such as ghrta, valour, lustre, glory, Thejewel is one's own power and potential and the art and science of the possible which you win by your own effort, through gifts of parents, teachers and the seniors by the grace of G od. The range of the possi bl e starts with the product and prosperity of food and goes up to universal victory of world nature. 
2721 :With vision, valour and lustre I fell the cleverness and callousness of the head and heart of the uncreative, unproductive evader of social obligations, the internal saboteur, evil at heart and rank hater of society. 
2722 :Thisjewel of abundantfood born of ploughshare and farming would come to me by hard work in full measure with delightful vigour and valour and it will act for me as an armour for security and protection. 
2723 :As the skilled carpenter with expert hand and adze chiselled and shaped you, O plough-share, from that state let pure life-giving waters purify and sanctify you with living food for life. 
2724 :Let this gold threaded jewel bear and bring us faith, yajna and glory, and abide in our home like an honoured visitor without any definitedate, permanently. 
2725 :Tothatjewel visitor we offer ghrta, exhilarating drink, honey and food of many varieties. May the visitor, come from the divinities, bring us, like father for his children, honour, goodness and greatness again and again, day by day. 
2726 :Thatjewel of abundantfood born of the ploughshare of khadira wood, powerful and replete with ghrta, which Brhaspati, the cosmic high priest, tied for the sake of strength and splendour, Agni, leading light of the land, received and wore. May thatjewel create and bring in for the recipient holy ghrta for the expansion of theyajnaof the social order, again and again, day by day. 
2727 :O man, with thatjewel of abundance and power destroy those forces which hate and destroy. 
2728 :Thatjewel of abundance, powerful and replete with ghrta, born of the plough-share of Khadira wood, which Brhaspati, the high priest, tied for the sake of strength and splendour, I ndra, the mighty ruler, received and wore for splendour, valour and peace and prosperity. May that jewel create and bring in for the recipient strength for the expansion of the yajna of the social order again and agian, day by day. 
2729 :O man, with that jewel of abundance and power destroy those forces which hate and destroy. 
2730 :That jewel of abundance, powerful and replete with ghrta, born of the plough share of K hadira wood, which Brhaspati, the high priest, tied for the sake of strength and splendour, Sama, head of the spirit and powers of peace, order and joy, received and wore for vision, wisdom and listening to the revelation of the truth of universal order. May that jew el create and bring infortherecipientlightand splendour again and again, day by day. 
2731 :O man, with that jewel of abundance, light and splendour, destroy the forces that hate and destroy. 
2732 :That jewel of abundance, powerful and replete with ghrta, born of the plough share of khadira wood, which Brhaspati, cosmic high priest, tied for the sake of strength and splendour, the sun received and wore and thereby conquered all the directions of space. May that jewel create and bring in for the recipient superabundance of prosperity and lightagain and again, more and more, day by day. 
2733 :O man, with that jewel of light and abundance, destroy the forces that hate and destroy. 
2734 :That jewel of abundance, powerful and replete with ghrta, born of the plough share of the Khadira wood of nature, which Brhaspati, the cosmic high priest, tied for the sake of strength and splendour, Chandrama, the moon, received and bore, and thereby conquered the golden cities of demons and devourers. That created and brought in for the recipient beauty and grace more and more, day by day. 
2735 :O man, with that jewel of abundance and grace, eliminate the forces which hate and destroy. 
2736 :That jewel-mani, divine thought, which Brhaspati, lord creator of the expansive universe, created and bore by himself for the origination of dynamic energy, that thought and energy set i n motion the speed of evolution for this same lord, set it in motion more and ever more, moment by moment of chronological time. 
2737 :O man, as part of the evolution, eliminate the forces that hate, oppose and negate the process of evolution. 
2738 :That jewel-mani of divine thought which B rhaspati set in motion for the origination of dynamic energy for the evolution of existence, by thatveryjewel energy the Ashvins, twin motions of prana and apana currents of cosmic energy circuit, protect and promote this process of Biological evolution and agriculture. The same jewel creates and takes forward the grand evolution for the twin procreative forces, the A shvi ns, O man, as part of the evolution, eliminate the forces that hate, oppose and negate the process of evolution. 
2739 :That jewel-mani of divine thought which B rhaspati set in motion for the origination of dynamic energy for the evolution of existence, thatmani, Savita, the sun, bore and thereby won this light of heaven. That same Savita, the light and divine energy, distilled and revealed the divine knowledge and the language of divine knowledge for this humanity more and evermore, moment by moment, day by day. 
2740 :O man, by virtue of the same light and truth, eliminate the forces of hate and enmity which negate the process of knowledge and progress. 
2741 :That jewel-mani of divine thought which Brhaspati set in motion for the origination of dynamic energy for the evolution of existence, that same divine energy, waters bear as a jewel and always flow unhurt and unobstructed. That same divine energy distils the nectar of life for these waters and for humanity from these waters, more and ever more, day by day. 
2742 :O man, by the same flow of energy, the waters, and the nectar of life, eliminate the forces of hate and enmity which negate life's progress. 
2743 :That jewel-mani of divine thought which Brhaspati set in motion for the origination of divine energy for the evolution of existence, that same jewel- mani, giver of peace and well being, the refulgent ruler Varuna received and wore, and that broughtfor this ruler the truth of the reality of life across the universe, the world and the regions of the world, and all the time brings in the truth of life more and ever more, day by day. 
2744 :O man, by virtue of the truth of life and its evolution, throw outtheforces of hate and enmity which negate life's progress and truth. 
2745 :That jewel-mani of divine thought which B rhaspati set in motion for the origination of dynamic energy for the evol uti on of existence, that same energy, the Devas, divine forces of nature and noble people of light, knowledge and generosity, received and bore, and, with their struggle for evolution and progress, won all the regions of the world. That same energy and the struggle brought and brings victory more and evermore, day by day. 
2746 :O man, by the same energy and the same struggle, throw off the forces of hate and enmity which negate and obstruct the struggle for progress and evolution. 
2747 :That jewel-mani of divine thought which B rhaspati set in motion for the origination of dynamic energy for the evol uti on of exi stence, that very j ewel of thought and energy, giver of peace and well being, the D evatas, people of excel I ence and their mi nd and senses, received and bore, and that jewel distilled for them and still distils all the experience of the world more and ever more, day by day. 
2748 :O man, by the same energy, mind, senses and experience, rule out the forces of hate and enmity which negate and obstruct the honour and excellence of life. 
2749 :That same divine will and energy, the seasons bear, all cycles of the seasons and all that conform to the seasons bear, and the year, which is the presiding power of time over the seasons, bears and thereby protects and promotes all existent facts and processes of the universe over the ways of evolution. 
2750 :That jewel of divine will and energy, all directions, spaces, interspaces and interdirections bear and observe in action. May that same jewel of divine will initiated, and set in evolutionary motion by Prajapati, throw down and out all forces of hate and Atharvans, sages of steady mind free from fluctuation and negativity, bear that same jew el of divine will and energy in their heart and soul. Their disciples and followers too bear the same jewel. By the power of that very jew el, vibrant A ngi rasas, sages of leading light and energy, shattered the strongholds of negation and destruction. 
2751 :O man, by the same jewel of divine will, light and energy, destroy the forces of hate and enmity which negate and obstruct the excellence and progress of humanity. 
2752 :That jew el-mani of power and potential, Dhata, lord of the universe, bore and manifested as his will and dynamic energy, and he created the world of variety in all its multitude. By the same jewel power of your own possibility, O man, eliminate all those negations, hate and oppositions which obstruct your individual, social and spiritual evolution. 
2753 :That jewel-mani of divine power and potential which Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, bore and generated for the divinities of nature and humanity, for the evolution of existence and for the control and destruction of evil, has come to me also with the splendour and delight of being (to participatein the evolution of divinity and destruction of evil in my course of life). 
2754 :That jewel-mani of divine power and potential, which Brhaspati bore and generated for the divinities for the evolution of existence and control of evil and negativity, has come to me with cows, goats and sheep, and with food and progeny. 
2755 :That jewel-mani of divine power and potential, which Brhaspati bore and generated for the divinities for the evolution of existence and control of evil and negativities, has come to me with rice and barley, greatness and prosperity. 
2756 :That jewel-mani of divine power and potential, which Brhaspati bore and generated for the divinities for the evolution of existence and control of evil and negativities, has come to me with streams of honey and ghrta, the mani with the food of life. 
2757 :That jew el-mani of divine power and potential, which Brhaspati bore and generated for the divinities for the evolution of existence and control of evil and negativities, has come to me with water, milk and energy, with wealth and with beauty, honour and grace. 
2758 :That jewel-mani of divine power and potential, which Brhaspati bore and generated for the divinities for the evolution of existence and control of evil and negativities, has come to me with lustre and splendour, with honour, excellence and fame. 
2759 :That jew el-mani of divine power and potential, which Brhaspati bore and generated for the divinities for the evolution of existence and control of evil and negativities, has come to me with all wealth and good fortunes of existence. 
2760 :May the divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity give me that jewel power and potential for growth and prosperity which sunpasses the rivals, overcomes the adversaries, defeats the enemies and leads the social order to excellence and advancement, yes, that power, potential, and the order of law for existence. 
2761 :With the divine law, with honour, lustre and excellence, I take on and dedicate myself to this peaceful and blessed power and potential, jewel-mani gifted by Brhaspati, power which has no rival, no adversary, which has overthrown all my rivals and adversaries, and which has rendered me free. 
2762 :May this jewel power born of divinities and gifted raise me to superiority and victory over the powers of hate and enmity, the power whose gift of sustenance, vitality and milk of mercy and grace, all these three worlds of heaven, earth and the firmament worship and enjoy. May this divine gift raise me to the top of excellence and this highest merit seat of life. 
2763 :May that divine jewel gift of power and potential, by which all divinities of nature and humanity, all human beings in general and all sustaining powers have their life and existence always, raise meto the top of excellence and the highest merit seat of life. 
2764 :Just as the seed grows to life and luxuriance in the fertile soil tilled by the plough, so may, in my life, progeny, wealth of animals and food rise and grow more and ever more. 
2765 :O divine jewel gift of power and potential, augmenter of the yajna of life, generous harbinger of a hundred gifts of merit and prosperity, whoever the person, progeny or disciple I consecrate with you, may this blessed gift of divinity, inspire, energise and raise the recipient to the top of excellence. 
2766 :O Holy fire, lover of this holy fuel brought up and offered with faith, rise and rejoice by our offers of oblations, which, we pray, receive and reward us. O friends, in the fire of omniscience, lighted and raised with divine knowledge and the chant of Vedic verses, let us discover and find for ourselves noble intelligence and wisdom, happiness and well being, divine vision and the wealth of life. 
2767 :This Sukta is the Song of Skambha, Jyeshtha Brahma, the One central, all sustaining, Supreme Spi rit- force of the universe which holds, sustains and controls every part of the universe in its place with its function. 
2768 :The Spirit is pure spirit, Akayam, body-less (Yajurveda, 40, 8). Still in the Veda and other Vedic literature, it is described metaphorically as Purusha, the cosmic person whose body is the universe. In this Sukta also, Skambha is metaphorically described as a person with its body parts and their place and function. The whole sukta is a beautiful poem created by cosmic imagination. 
2769 :heat of will and intention, abide? In which part does Rtam, truth and law of mutability, abide, held and controlled in function? Where the vow of discipline and commitment? Where faith in existence? In which part doesSatyam, reality of the constancy base of mutability, abide, held in place? From which part and power of it does fire burn and shine? From which part or power of it does the wind blow across the firmament? From which part, by what power, does the moon traverse the space, covering which part of mighty Skambha? In which part of it does earth abide? In which part does the firmament abide? I n which part does the solar region abide, held and sustained? And in which part does the higher heavens of light abide? W hitherward does the high fire of the sun burn and radiate, seeking and striving for what? Whitherward does the spatial wind of energy blow, seeking and striving for what? Witherward do the cosmic whirlpools of stars, planets and galaxies turn, and turn round and round, seeking and striving for what? Speak of that Skambha, that centre-hold explosive, to me, which one is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, ultimate centre and the circumference. 
2770 :W hither do fortnights move, whither the months, integrated with the year? Whither do the seasons proceed, with all that happens therein? Where and whither? Speak to me of that Skambha, that centre-hold controller, which one is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, ultimate centre and the circumference. 
2771 :Whither, seeking and striving for what, do the day and night, youthful maidens ever fresh, so different yet in perfect accord, hasten on? Whither, seeking and striving for what, do the whirlpools of waters and time flow incessantly? Speak to me of that Skambha, that centre-hold controller, which one is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, ultimate centre and the circumference. 
2772 :Wherein, having fixed and secured all regions of the universe, Prajapati, father, guardian and ruler of the children of his creation, sustains them, of that Skambha speak to me, which one is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, ultimate centre and the circumference. 
2773 :Of the highest, lowest and the middle order of the form of the universe which Prajapati, cosmic progenitor, created, how much does Skambha, the sustaining divine, pervade therein, and how much is that which it does not pervade? (Prajapati and Skambha are one and the same divinity, Prajapati, the creative, and Skambha, the pervasive sustaining aspect.) To what extent did Skambha enter the created world? To what extent is it dormant in relation to the future? That one part of its metaphoric personality, i.e., Prakrti, which it shaped into a thousandfold variety, how much did Skambha pervade therein? Wherein, as learned sages know, all created worlds and treasures abide, all food and waters abide, and wherein both the constant and the mutable abide, of that Skambha, pray speak to me. W hich one of all is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2774 :W herein Tapa, discipline of enlightened living, rises higher to the superior discipline of Vrata, commitment, wherein are integrated Rtam, truth and law, Shraddha, faith,A pah, Karma, and Brahma, knowledge, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me. W hich one is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2775 :Wherein earth and firmament, wherein the heaven of light, all abide comprehended, wherein fire and Iight energy, the moon, the sun and the w i nds abide, self-surrendered to the law, of that Skambha, pray, speak Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2776 :In whose power and presence are integrated and comprehended all the thirty-three divine forces, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2777 :(The thirty three Devas or divinities are: eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twel veA dityas, I ndra, i .e., energy, and yajna, natural dynamics of life sustenance.) Wherein the first born Rshis, i.e., the seven Rshi pranas, seven first born evolutes of Prakrti comprising M ahan, A hankara and five elements, and the first born Vedic visionaries abide; wherein Rks, Samans, Yajus and the great hymns of Atharva abide, wherein the one Rshi, i.e., omniscience and later Reason and logic abide in order, all self-surrendered, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one of all is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2778 :Wherein immortality and death both abide in thePurusha, comprehended, whose arteries are the seas comprehended in the Purusha, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one of all is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2779 :Whose veins and arteries are the four major quarters of spacewhich abidein order, wherein nature's yajna of the evolution of existence goes on and on, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one of all is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2780 :Those who experience and this way know Brahma, immanent Purusha, vibrating in the heart and soul of the individual purusha, know the Supreme Purusha.He that knows the Supreme, he that knows Prajapati, the creator, and they that know the Supreme Soul celebrated in the Veda, they know and apprehend the Skambha, i.e., the creator Prajapati, the immanent Brahma pervasive in nature and the individual soul, and the transcendent Brahma, the One Skambha reflecting and existing in variety of presence and function, as It is. 
2781 :Whose head is Vaishvanara, cosmic fire that blazes in the sun on high, whose eye is the radiant rays of light and knowledge that illuminate and enlighten all within and without, whoselimbsareall moving stars, pianets and galaxies, indeed the entire dynamic systems of the universe, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one, for sure, is that? Say it is Skambha, only that which is all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2782 :W hose speech, they say, is B rahma, the universal Veda, whose tongue is the honey sweet cosmic speech of theVedic knowledge, whose treasure-hold of energy and vitality is the refulgent universe itself of Prakrti, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one, for sure, is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the centre and the circumference of existence, ultimately. 
2783 :From whom Rks of the Veda are received, realised and articulated in form and meaning, from whom the Yajus are received, from whom the Samans arise as hair grow from the body, and whose natural spontaneous word of speech isAtharva-veda, received, realised and articulated by the Angirasas, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one, for sure, is That? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2784 :Some people believe that the constant, self- existent, primordial state of Prakrti, wherein there is no germination and no branch, is the supreme reality. Others believe that the germinated, variously branched off mutable state of the world alone is the reality and they recognise and worship it as such. (Both of them do not know the Skambha.) Wherein Twelve Adityas, eleven Rudras and eight Vasus abide comprehended, wherein past, present and future and all regions of the world of existence abide, comprehended and sustained, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one, for sure, is that? Say it is Skambha, only that of all, the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2785 :Whose treasu re-hold of the universe thi rty-three Devas, divinities of nature, constantly protect and preserve, serve and promote, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me. O Devas, who now knows that treasure- hold of divinity which you protect and promote? Wherethedivinesages, who know theSupreme Brahma, know and meditate on the Supreme Divinity, there, whoever knows those Brahma-realised souls directly, he would, for sure, know Brahma and become worthy of being Brahma, high-priest of the yajna of Brahma-realisation. 
2786 :Great indeed are those Devas which were born of primordial Prakrti. Sages say that that (Premordial Prakrti) is only one limb of Skambha. That primordial Prakrti, A sat is beyond the Devas. And Skambha is beyond that too. 
2787 :When and where Skambha, creating the world of existence, repeats the old story of creation, that too is only one limb of Skambha which, the sages know, is a new version of the old and eternal. 
2788 :In whose (i.e., Skambha's) one divine wing of creation in the evolutionary process, thirty three Devas take their own specific forms and functions, these thirty- three divinities also, in their forms and functions, some Brahma-realised sages know. 
2789 :Knowledgeable people know Hiranyagarbha, the golden womb of creation, highest and beyond description. It is Skambha that generated the creative Prakrti and formed the golden blue-print of the universe in the very beginning of creative evolution in the world of existence. 
2790 :The worlds of existence abide in Skambha. Tapas, forging heat of the maker's furnace, is in Skambha. Rtam, the law of change and formation, abides comprehended in Skambha. O Skambha, I know you by direct experience : Everything abides comprehended in Indra, your omnipotence. 
2791 :The worlds of the universe abide i n I ndra. Tapas, the forging heat and skill, abides in Indra. Rtam, the law of mutability and formal evolution, abides comprehended and controlled in Indra. Hey Indra, I know you by direct experience. I know all and every thing abides comprehended in Skambha. (Skambha is Indra, and Indra is Skambha.) Before sun-rise, before the dawn, the sage invokes the One original name of Divinity, 'Aurn', by the functional name (Savita, Agni, Indra) of his own choice in Samadhi, and thereby realises the One unborn, eternal Skambha, that which, first of all in the creative process, self-manifested, assumes the sovereign power and potential as Indra, other than which there is none higher or highest that is, has been, or would be. 
2792 :Skambha, whose one measure of foot-step is the earth, the middle space, his belly, and who has created the heaven of light as his forehead, to that Supreme Brahma, homage of worship and submission! Whose eye is the sun and the moon ever new, who has created Agni as his mouth and speech, to that Supreme Brahma, homage of worship and submission! W hose prana and apana energies are the winds, and the sun rays, light of the eye, who has created the quarters of space as media of his perception and communication of knowledge, to that Supreme Brahma, homage of worship and adoration in submission! Skambha holds and sustai ns both the heaven and the earth, Skambha holds and sustains the vast firmament, Skambha holds and sustains the six vast directions of space, and Skambha pervades, holds and sustains this whole universe. 
2793 :W ho manifested from the heat and effort of his thought and will, who manifests in the devotee's awareness through yogi c effort of rel entless practice and continuous discipline of austerity, who pervades all worlds of existence with his omnipresence, who has created, wholly and solely, Soma, only Soma, peace and joy, to that Supreme Brahma, homage of worship and Why doesn'tthe wind ever go to sleep? How is it that the mind never stops still? Do the waters, as also the acts of will and nature, seeking and striving in search of the truth of reality, ever rest and come to a stand still? (No! Why?) The Mighty Supreme, adorable Skambha, is ever on the move in the midst of the universe and on top of its dynamics. In that and on that relentless Brahma depend and abide all those that are the divine forces of nature, like branches abiding and living on and around the trunk of the tree. (That's why the winds, the waters and the mind never come to a stand still, they vibrate and flow with divine vitality.) To which all divinities of nature and humanity in the world, bound within the Unbound, offer homage, to which they offer homage with hands, feet, words, ear and eye, of that Skambha, pray, speak to me, which one, for sure, is that? Say it is Skambha, only that one of all, which is the ultimate centre and circumference of existence. 
2794 :Darkness is off from that, eternally. It is immaculate, unsullied, absolutely free from sin and evil. All the three lights (which abide in earth, firmament and heaven) abide in that Prajapati. 
2795 :The One who pervades the golden warp and woof of the universe abiding in space and time, that is the mysterious Prajapati existing below the surface reality of it. 
2796 :Two young maidens both different in form and colour, different in form and function, separately yet together facing each other weave the six-dimensional structure and texture of the world of exi stence. O ne spi ns out the threads, the other receives and fits them into form and design. They neither forsake this work nor rest nor do they take it to the end. 
2797 :(Thetwo maidens can be interpreted as day and night or as the creative and consumptive aspects of the process of natural evolution.) Of these two maidens, dancing as if on the stage of the world of existence and structuring the design and form of the universe, I do not know which is the former and which is the latter. In fact, it is the Purusha, the creator Brahma, which generates the Prakrtic material, weaves the web, and then winds up the dance and then bears the entire play beyond the pleasure and pain of the world of Becoming (Mutability) into the state of These di mensions of space and ti me and the rays of the light of omniscience uphold the warp and woof of existence unto the heavens of light, and they create the Samans of knowledge and divine devotion and joy and also the shuttles for weaving of theweb of existence for man's rise to the heaven of joy beyond pleasure and pain. 
2798 :To the One Supreme Absolute Brahma who ordains, rules and presides over all that is,has been, and all that shall be, whose nature and being is pure light and absolute joy, homage of worship and surrender. 
2799 :B oth these, heaven and earth, hoi d fast i n pi ace, stabilised in orbit by Skambha, centre-hold of the universe. All this living existence that's breathing, waking, winking and sleeping is stabilised in Skambha. 
2800 :Three are the orders of creation : sattvic as light, rajasic as energy, and tamasic as solid material, all on the move to and by the faster than the fastest, while the Infinite Brahma stands still at the centre though it pervades and vi brates across alI the closest and farthest worlds of space in existence: the subtlest of sattvic order abide by theAdorable as light by the sun, the middling ones of rajasic order as wind and electric energy abide in the middle region, and the gross and dark of tamasic order as solid ones, woods and greens, abide on earth, thesun pervading all and holding all at the centre. (Thus the heaven of light, the firmament of wind and electric energy, and the earth of magnetic energy, all abide by and around the central sun.) One is the wheel, twelve segments of the felly, three segments of the nave. Who would know that wheel of existence? Three hundred and sixty are the spokes fixed therein, and as many spikes, all fixed and firm, immovable. He, Brahma, would know that. 
2801 :O Savita, bright seeker, know this wherein there are six that move according to the law of divine nature. One is one alone born of one, and unto that one alone born of one, they wish to join, seeking unity and fulfilment. 
2802 :[This mantra is a mystical vision of the universe at the microcosmic level as well as at the macrocosmic At the microcosmic level of the individual, the human being comprises five elements (Akasha, Vayu, Agni, A pah and Prthivi) and one mind (mana, buddhi, chitta and ahankara which is also called Antahkaranachatushtaya, the fourfold personality). These make up the six. Corresponding to the five elements, there are five senses (shabda, sparsha, rupa, rasa and gandha, the mind being, again, the sixth. These are formal and functional mutations of Prakrti. The five gross elements are the gross elements of Prakrti, and the five senses are sensuous mutati ons of the same five el ements but at their subtle I evel. The mi nd i s a mutation of M ahat-tattva which is the first evolute of Prakrti in the process of creative evolution. The five serve the sixth, mind, and all the six serve the soul. The mind is called Ekaja, born of one because it is born of one, Mahat. The soul is unborn and eternal, and Brahma, creative Prajapati, gives it the existential personality when it brings the body and soul together. A s the body- soul individual microcosm evolves through the physical and biological evolution of Prakrti, so does it recede, back to Prakrti and the self-existent soul. 
2803 :At the macrocosmic level, the story of evolution is the same: It starts from the 'Zero' state, continues unto Infinity and receds into the 'Zero' state: The 'Zero' state is the pre-creation stage which is neither tangible nor describable, only One, Brahma, was awake with its Svadha, Shakti, which was Prakrti and thej ivatmas (Rgveda, 10,129,1-5). With the will of Brahma, Prakrti arose and manifested into its first tangible form, M ahat. M ahat evolved into subtle elements and the intelligential mutation, which further evolved into sense-mind complex on the one hand and the gross elements on the other. The five elements (A kasha, Vayu, Agni, A pah and Prthivi) and the sense- mind complex are the six at the macro-cosmic level which arise from one Prakrti-M ahat and recede back into it according to the laws of nature the same way as at the micro-cosmic level. The microcosm serves the individual soul, and the macrocosm, the universal soul, Supreme Brahma.] Brahma, Supreme Reality, eternal and adorable Spiritof existence, mysteriously hidden underthefolds of its own Shakti, Prakrti, manifests through the worlds of existence. In that Spirit alone all this that moves and breathes abides, self-surrendered. 
2804 :The same Spirit exists deep in the caverns of human heart and soul, and that is the Supreme state of Being worthy of realisation and attainment, for sure, beyond all doubt. 
2805 :Oneisthewheel of the universe, one is the fel ly, the transcendent Brahma, (so one is the central axis, the same one immanent Brahma), yet thousands are the spokes and axes, wheels within wheels, moving up and down, forward and backward, east and west. With one part of his Shakti, P rakrti, B rahma has formed the entire universe, where is the rest of it? W hat happened? The one that bears and ordains the universe of five elements moves foremost, the rest, joined in order, follow. The stillness of its movement, Ayatam, is seen, at the cross section, but the movement, Yatam, is not seen. The farthest of it is closest, and the closest is farthest. 
2806 :(This mantra can be interpreted in relation to the human individual as well : The soul that takes the i niti ati ve and carri es the five-el ement personal i ty moves first and the rest of personality follows. The past is not seen because i n the present I ife the past I ife i s obi iterated, but the present and future plans and actions can be visualised.) The cup of life (the universe as well as the human individual) is upside down, the bottom upward and the open side down. The entire honour, excellence and glory of life and the world is contained therein. There are seven Rshis there which together are its great protectors and promoters. 
2807 :(A reflection of this mantra can be seen in Kathopanishad, 2, 3, 1, and in Gita, 15, 1, where the universe is described as a tree whose roots are, on top and the rest, trunk, branches and leaves are downward. The root of the tree is B rahma, the Supreme on top and the world of Prakrtic evolution downward. The seven promoters of it are the five elements, pranic energies and the immanent will of Divinity. 
2808 :At the individual human level, the cup is the brain with the spinal cord and the nervous system downward. The seven Rshisaretwo eyes, two ears, two nostrils and the mouth. All perception, judgement, memory, intelligence, and imagination with the sense of honour and excellence is centred there.) That word and voice which is used first in the beginning, which is used at the end, which is used all round and all ways, by which yajna is expanded and extended further forward, that I ask of you. W hich one of the Rks is that? (That word and voice is A urn as explained in Gopatha Brahmana Part-1, Prapathaka 1, section 22.) flies, whatever stops and stays, whatever is breathing, or not breathing, winking or waking, indeed all that is, the entire universal form of existence, Skambha bears and sustains. All that, having been, having receded through the process of involution and become one with Prakrti, recedes as one with Brahma. 
2809 :The infinite is expanded and expansive manifold, many ways. The infinite and the finite, ultimately, are one, together and the same. The Omniscient Brahma, lord protector of eternal bliss, integrating, disintegrating, re-integrating, gathering and watching the past, present and future of this al I, pervades and vitalises the finite and the infinite. 
2810 :Prajapati pervades and vibrates in the vast spaces of the evolving, expansive universe, unseen, yet manifests in many ways. From and with a part of his potential, Prakrti, he creates the entire universe. What and what sort is the rest of it, what form, what identity, of all? People, with their eye, see a waterman carrying a pitcher of water on his head (but they do not see the water), so people see the universal pitcher of existence with their physical eye but they fail to see the burden bearer within, Skambha, the pervasive Brahma, with their inner eye of the mind. 
2811 :Yet, even though far from the mind's eye, it abides: with the full, with light and fragrance to the optimum, and with the deficient, with completion when called upon. The adorable great is glorious in the midst of the universe. To hi m, the keepers of the Rashtra order of humanity bear homage of adoration. 
2812 :set, only That, I know and believe, is the highest, Supreme Brahma. That, no one can ever surpass. 
2813 :Those who all round speak of the direct, present, middling and the ancient and external omniscient Brahma as One, Agni, the light of life, or second as Purusha and Prakrti, or third as Purusha, Prakrti and Jivatma, or as Hansa, the omnipresent spirit of the universe, all speak of the same one Aditya, eternal, imperishable Brahma. 
2814 :The two wings of divine activity (of constancy in mutability and mutability in constancy, through the chain of cause and effect of Prakrti) of the Cosmic allsaving Bird, flying to the state of freedom and bliss, remain open and active for a thousand days (i.e., one thousand four-age units, each unit being four million and three hundred twenty thousand years) of the age of humanity (equal to four billion and three hundred twenty million years). The bird flies on, carrying on the wings all the Devas, divine forces of nature and humanity through all regions of the universe, watching all and every thing. 
2815 :The man in whom the presence of Supreme Brahma is steadily realised in awareness in the heart and soul rises high and shines with truth. He watches every thing all round objectively in the light of divine Vedic knowledge and boldly lives his life to the full across all ways of the world by the force and power of his pranic energy. 
2816 :Onewho knowsthetwo arani woodswith which the heat and light of fire is generated and received by attrition is really wise. He would know the Supreme Brahma at heart in the soul by realisation, and he would know the great knowledge and the wide world that Brahma has created and sustains by pervasive presence and divine will. (Refer also to Shvetashvatara Upanishad, 1, 14 for fire-like generation of Brahma Brahma before the beginning of the created universe was indiscrete, so it was pure bliss. In the created existence it became discrete, thinkable in four states, and thus it became a subject of thought, meditation and realisation. And at the time of the dissolution of the created universe it withdraws everything unto itself as one swallows food. 
2817 :(Refer to M andukyopanishad 2-7 for A pat and Chatushpat. States of Brahma.) Whoever worships and meditates on Eternal Brahma, highest object of worship, would receive unbounded food of Iife and joy, and indeed B rahma itself would reveal its presence as food for his joyous experience in meditation. 
2818 :They say this Brahma is Sanatana, Eternal, beyond time and age, and yet it arises ever anew in time and presence, astheday and night arise anew and follow each other in relation to the form and time of the occasion. 
2819 :Hundred, thousand, ten thousand, million, hundred million, uncountable, are the wealths of itsown Prakrtic mutations concentred in this Supreme Divinity. People receive and benefit from them while he overwatches them all. For this reason this divine, infinitely generous Brahma, is dear and adorable. 
2820 :Something is finer and subtler than a hair. And another something is still finer, so fine that it is hardly visible. Finer and subtler than even that, darling embraceable, is that Supreme Divinity to me, dear, inalienable. 
2821 :(Something finer and subtler than a hair is Prakrti which, as Prakrti, is subtler than any mutation of it in existential form. Another something which is not even visible may be interpreted as the individual soul. And the Supreme Divinity is Brahma, subtler than the subtlest. Refer K athopanishad, 1, 3,10-11 and 2, 3, 7-8. 
2822 :This interpretation followsfrom mantra 24: The uncountable gifts are gifts of Prakrti. The receiving beneficiary is the human soul in body. A nd the giver is the Supreme Brahma.) This infinitely benevolent, unaging, immortal D i vi ni ty, this creative power, I i es there i n the heart core: for whom? Forthatsoul which does its karma and grows from childhood to ripe old age. 
2823 :O soul, you are man, you are woman, you are the boy and/or the girl. Grown old in body, you walk with a stick. As you are born in body you take the many forms of life in conformity with the body-state in time. 
2824 :And you become the father of these many children, or the son or daughter of these many father or mother forms, or the eldest or the youngest of many. All the same, one, the same, is the divine soul abiding i n the heart core, the same born f i rst at the begi nni ng of thelifecyclein body, andthesamethatwasinthewomb. 
2825 :From the full, complete and perfect Infinity, the full, complete and perfect infinity of the cosmic tree is evolved. The infinite is poured and all round sustained by Infinity. Let us now know whence the cosmic tree is sprinkled and sustained. 
2826 :This power and presence is eternal. It has existed since eternity and it will exist eternally. It is immeasurably ancient and comprehends everything. This Almighty Power illuminates the dawns, and, moment by moment, itwatchesall that winks and wakes All protective is this power and presence covered in its own laws of nature's mutability. By the light and form of its own might, the green trees wear the garland beauty of nature. 
2827 :Though It is within in the heart core, and man can not forsake It, still man does not attain to It, Nor does he even see It though it is at the closest. O man, see the devine poetry of Brahma which neither dies nor grows old. And man too, having seen It nether dies nor grows old. 
2828 :Words inspired and revealed by ancient, eternal, unprecedented Brahma speak of Divinity and its powers and infinite potential as they are. And speaking, expressiveand meaningful, where they ultimately retire, that they say is Supreme Brahma, highest of all. 
2829 :Wherein the Devas, divine powers of nature, and human beings stay in their place and function like spokes of a wheel fixed in the nave, that same central core, bloom of the dynamics of existence, abiding with its mysterious power within its mysterious manifestations, I ask of you. 
2830 :How many and which ones are those divinities, pioneers and conductors of the dynamics of existence, by which, inspired and energised, thewind blows, which produce the five integrated directions of natural evolution, and which cherish and honour the oblations offered into the natural yajna and the creative endeavour of humanity? Of these divinities, one, Agni, pervades and covers the earth, another, Vayu, covers the middle regions all over, of these and over these, one, the sun that holds the solar system, gives the light of heaven, and al I these pervade and protect al I di recti ons of space. 
2831 :One who knows the web of life spread around, into which are woven all these forms of creation including humanity, and the one that knows the one essential and universal thread running through theentire web, that person really knows the M ahad-Brahma, Supreme Brahma and its creation. 
2832 :I know the web of life spread around, into which are woven all these forms of creation including humanity, and I know the one essential and universal thread running through the entire web, the one that is the M ahad-Brahma, Supreme Brahma, its power and When the universal fire in flames arose, heating and burning in and between heaven and earth, where were the pre-existing spaces which serve but only one master? W here was M atarishva, wind and energy of the universe? M atari shva there was, entered in the quarters of space, so were all dynamics and divine forces of nature entered in space. Brhad-Brahma was there comprehending all dynamics and spaces, and so was the all-sanctifying Brahma pervasive in all quarters of space. (All were in Brahma, and Brahma was in them.) and vision of the evolution of existence, Brhad-Brahma created Gayatri, saving light and Word of the Veda for human attainment of the bliss of immortality. Those who know Sama, peace and divine bliss, by the samans know that unborn eternal Brahma by direct experience in meditative communion. What doubt, and where, can it be? (By Gayatri man rises higher to the bliss of immortality.) G ateway to the concentred peace and wealth of the world, B rhad-B rahma is ever true to his ordinances of Dharma as the refulgent Sun, and he stands by us as omnipotent I ndra in our strugglefor wealth, honour and excellence of life. 
2833 :N ine-door lotus flower of nature is our human body covered and conditioned by three prakrtic gunas of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, an integrated organism of thought, energy and matter. Therein abides the adorable M ahad-Brahma, that resides along with the soul, that the sagely scholars of Divinity know, to that they attain. 
2834 :Beyond desire, constantly calm and resolute, immortal, self-existent, is all-supreme, self-blest with the beauty and sweetness of his own creation, Brhad- Brahma no-way wanting or imperfect. Having realised and attained to that constant, unaging, eternally young and ever new Suprer-Soul, the sagely scholar, self- realised, never fears death. 
2835 :This is a hymn to the divine M other that sustains her children with material, intellectual and spiritual food for survival and progress without, of course, ruling out 'thecow'. 'TheCow' isa metaphorforthedivineCow: the earth, sunlight, Prakrti itself, Veda-vani and others and their gifts. 
2836 :O divine M other, shut the mouths of sinners and crimi nals. U pon the adversaries, strike this thunderbolt. Mother gift of Indra's, first giver of a hundred nourishments, is the destroyer of enemies and a guide for the yajamana in his journey through life. 
2837 :O mother voice of a hundred divine gifts of Word and yajna, let this yajna vedi be your body cover, let these grasses which are on the vedi be your divine hair, let this tongue secure you as a giftfor adoration. O mother Oshadhi, mitigator of pain and suffering, let the soma stone be moving as if dancing with joy when it grinds the soma herb for juice. 
2838 :O mother voice of divinity, holy cow inviolable, giver of a hundred nourishments, let the vessels of consecrating yajna waters be your hair, let the tongue that utters the words sanctify us to purity. Having been energised and purified by the holy chant, be adorable on the vedi and rise to the heavens without prayers. 
2839 :One who enacts the yajna and perfects the mother voice of a hundred gifts by yajnic sanctification, becomes perfect with fulfilment of desire. His participants too who perform the yajna feel satisfied and f ulfi 11 ed, and they al so attain the fruits of their desi re as they wish and deserve. 
2840 :The yajaka rises to heavenly peace and happiness where the light of knowledge and worship lead him, if he, having madetheholy voice of a hundred gifts as the centre and sacred object of yajna, gives a gift of the 'cow' to the priest. 
2841 :He, who raises a cow, i.e., the Vedic voice of freedom, to the golden beauty of a hundredfold fertility and generosity and gives it, as a gift, attains to those states of earthly as well as heavenly joy which he cherishes. 
2842 :Ye te devi samitarah paktdro ye ca te janah. Te tvd sarve gopsyanti maibhyo bhaisih sataudane. 
2843 :O sacred cow of a hundred gifts of nourishment, divine mother, those people who serve and beautify you, those who raise you to perfection of maturity and fertility, they all will protect you. Do not fear any violators. 
2844 :Sacred life-giving mother, Vasus, generous people, from the right, M aruts, smart soldiers from the left, and Adityas, brilliant pursuers of the Veda in Brahmacharya, will protect you. Let you be proudly dedicated to the worship of Agni, lord of light and leadership, in jyotishtoma yajnic congregations. 
2845 :Devas, brilliant generous people, Pitaras, parental seniors, men in general, Gandharvas, protectors of the earthly environment, and Apsaras, those who guard the skies, these all will protect you. Be ready for a gift to the holy priest. 
2846 :The yajamana, who gives a 'shataudana cow' as a gift in yajna to the priest and others, attains to the gifts of the sky, heaven, earth, the Adityas of solar zodiacs, the winds, the quarters of space and all the regions of the world. 
2847 :O divine mother of prosperity, giver of ghrta for food and yajna in showers, your generosity will rise to the divinities. M other inviolable, do not be unkind to the devotee. Let the aroma of delicacies and the fragrance of ghrta rise to the heavens in abundance. 
2848 :For and from the divinities which are in heaven, in the sky, and these which are on this earth, always draw and yield milk, ghrta and the honey sweets of life's nourishment for body, mind and soul. 
2849 :Let your head, your mouth, your ears and your jaws yield cheese and curd, milk, ghrta, and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2850 :(From mantra 13 to 24, the description of parts of the cow's body system suggests that the'cow' is not literally the domestic cow, but the cosmic cow, as is described in Atharva-veda 9, 7, 25: "Thus this is the cow of the cosmic form (or cosmos of the cow form)." So in mantra 13, the head stands for Indra (electric energy) the jaws are heaven and earth (Atharva 9, 7,1- 2), the mouth is Agni and the quarters of space are the ears (Yajurveda 31, 12-13). 
2851 :The metaphor has been worked out in detail with Vedic evidence by Professor Vishvanath Vidyalankar in his commentary on Atharva-veda. 
2852 :Letyour lips, your nostrils, your horns and your eyes yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2853 :Let that which is your lungs, your heart, your pericardium with all the throat area yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2854 :Let that which is your liver, your kidneys, your intestines and the colon yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2855 :Let the rectum and omentum, the belly and the skin yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2856 :Let your marrow, your bone, your flesh, your blood yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta, and the honey Let your arms, your fore-arms, your shoulder blades, and your hump yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta, and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2857 :Let your neck, your shoulders, the ribs and sides yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2858 :Let your thighs, your knees, your hinder quarters and your rump yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta and the honey sweets of life'snourishmentsforthegenerous giver. 
2859 :Let your tail, the hair, the udder and the dugs yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta, and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2860 :Whatever is your thighs, whatever your dew- claws, whatever your pasterns, whatever your hoofs, let them all yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta, and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2861 :Whatever is your skin cover, O cosmic mother of a hundred gifts of food and enlightenment, whatever is your hair, O sacred mother inviolable, let them all yield curd and cheese, milk, ghrta, and the honey sweets of life's nourishments for the generous giver. 
2862 :cfwi 4,{U i y u <=i i^ hjPmm/R dl i # -df^t w qwrr n ^ ii Let the two purodasha cakes sprinkled with ghrta be like the wings of your loving bosom. O divine mother, take them as the wings to fly and thereon lead the cook to rise to the light of heaven. 
2863 :Whatever grains or particles of grains of rice are there on or in the mortar-pestle, whatever on the deer skin, whatever in the winnowing basket, and whatever the purifying, sanctifying wind blowing in the sky has shaken and sifted, may the holy fire of yajna accept all that as sacred offering. 
2864 :I pour streams of divine waters and Vedic voices replete with the sweetness of love as honey and grace of reverence as flavour of ghrta into the hands of Vedic priests, to each one separately. Whatever desire I address to you in faith with prayer, may that be fulfilled. I pray may we all be masters of wealth, honour and excellences of life with total fulfilment. 
2865 :The vasha cow of this sukta also is the metaphoric youthful mother cow, earth, firmament cosmic mother Prakrti vitalised by the omnipresence of M ahad-Brahma in its creative and sustaining function. (Atharva-veda 9, 7, 25) The metaphor works both ways: the universe is 'cow' and the'cow' is the universe. It is, further, A ghnya, Inviolable: the domestic cow must not be killed, not even hurt, and the cosmic cow cannot be violated and must not be desecrated by pollution. 
2866 :This spiritualised Prakrti is also an object of meditation in Vitarka and Nir-vitarka Samadhi. 
2867 :In a way the yogis in meditation and the scienti sts i n their I i brary and I aboratory are devotees of the 'mother cow.' O divine mother cow, homage and salutations to you, arising in the awareness. And homage and salutations to you arisen and realised in the consciousness. O mother inviolable, homage and salutations to your hair, hoofs and your divine form. 
2868 :One who knows the seven energies of senses and mind and of seven pranas working within, and knows the seven outer levels of the universe of five elements, laws of Rtam and Prakrti operative without, and also knows the head of yajna, soul and the Supersoul, such a person knows and realises the mother Cow. Such a priest deserves to receive the sacred cow as gift in yajna. 
2869 :I know the seven energies of sense and mind, the seven energies of pranas, working within, I know the seven outer levels of the universe of five elements, laws of Rtam and Prakrti itself operative without, I also know the head of yajna, soul and the Super-soul, and I also know Soma, the Spirit of peace and joy in this universe, the lord all-watching, all-inspiring. (I know We know and with Vedic songs joyously celebrate the generous mother cow by which the heaven of light, by which the earth, and by which these dynamic energies of the universe are sustained in security and balance, the all controlling Cow the gifts of which flow in a thousand streams. 
2870 :A hundred dedicated devotees, hundred beneficiaries, milkmen with lovely receptacles, hundred bodyguards at the back of it, and all those divinities of nature and humanity who receive their life-breath in it, all these know this universal Cow the same one way : She is the M other of life. 
2871 :Her seat is secured on theyajna vedi, she being abundant in milk and food for body, mind and soul. H er wealth of energy is her own, meant for divinities, for the children of earth especially. U niversal M other, divine brilliant sustainer of the clouds of rain, she reaches the noble humanity and divinities through cosmic currents of energy and hymns of the Veda. 
2872 :O Vasha, divine mother, atthedawn of creation, Agni emerged to your purpose as the vital heat of life, Soma emerged to your purpose as the cool and bliss of life. The cloud of showers is your udder, and the lightning your dugs, O mother spirit of well being. 
2873 :O Vasha, divine mother of the order of existence, first you distil and bring in the waters of the atmosphere, and later you bring in thefertile earth. Thirdly you raise and organise the Rashtra, social order of humanity and bring in water, milk and food of lifefor body, mind and soul for both the individual and the social order. 
2874 :O Vasha, divine mother of creativity, fertility and order, when called upon by the Adityas, solar zodiacs as by brilliant leaders of humanity, you come for I ndra, the sun as ruler of the world, I ndra received a thousand casks of Soma and had them protected by your presence. 
2875 :O divine mother, when, in response to the invocation of the A dityas, you reach I ndra, and Rshabha, the cloud, cries for water, for that reason the cloud breaker, the sun, passionate with cosmic heat, collects your water and nourishment of the world. 
2876 :And O Vasha, divine mother, when the passionately hot sun, custodian of the world's wealth, collects the waters of nourishment for the world, the same waters, this light and bliss, Naka, now secures in three cosmic regions. 
2877 :In three regions of the universe, that soma, the cosmic mother holds where Atharva, Prajapati, pervasive and self-committed, sits on the golden vedi of yajna on holy grass. 
2878 :Coming together with Soma and with all that move on foot, Vasha, the divine mother, presides unto and over the sea, along with keepers of the earth and the divine voice of Veda, with all earthly problems and ambitions. 
2879 :Come together with wind and with all that fly, Vasha, divine mother, dances around in ecstasy across the oceans of the middle space, bearing the Rks and music of the Samans. 
2880 :Come together with the sun and with all the lights that illuminate, reveal and see, Vasha, divine mother, pervades and watches the spatial ocean, bearing noble lights of divine bliss. 
2881 :Wrapped in golden halo, when you arose, O Vasha, bearing universal waters and nourishment within the strict bounds of cosmic law, then the universal divinity, having risen to the state of will and passion, inspired you with life. 
2882 :Where Atharva, scholar of Atharva-veda, dedicated and consecrated, sits on the holy grass on the golden vedi of light, there noble people and good fortunes, generous Vasha, divine mother, and food and plenty, all these join together and concentrate. 
2883 :Vasha is the mother of Rajanya, keepers of the social order. O Svadha, essential power of the self, food and plenty, Vasha is your mother too. A nd the chief arm and fighting force of the mother (against pollution outside and negative fluctuations within) is yajna, creative communion of society in corporate activity in the objective world on the one hand, and meditation of individual awareness of the soul on the Super-soul of existence within. And from this communion arises social awareness and spiritual illumination of the mind and soul. 
2884 :From that communion between the human and divine, with human potential and awareness concentrated to a point, the yogi rises, through the B rahma-randhra, highest gateway of the ascent of humanity and the descent of Divinity, he rises above the M ahat abstraction of Prakrti in the existential samadhi state, reborn as a participant in cosmic yajna. And there, O M other Divine, he calls on you, and there you emerge, and you bless. 
2885 :O Vasha, M other Shakti of the universe, from your mouth flow the songs of Veda. From U shnik verses of the Veda, flows strength and power, life's vigour and vitality of creation. Of creativity is born yajna, and from your motherly streams of vitality and flames of yajna radiate the showers of cosmic light. 
2886 :O Vasha, from your movement forward on forelegs and your movement backward on the thighs are born the Uttarayana and Dakshinayana motions of the earth-sun relationship in the solar system. F rom your system of cosmic metabolism are born all forms of life that sustain on food, and from your atmospheric spaces and rain therefrom, are born the herbs and trees which germinate and grow on earth. 
2887 :O Vasha, creative power of all-controlling Lord Supreme, when you retire into the all-covering, all- consuming Varuna, unfathomable Brahma, at the moment of total dissolution, later the Lord calls you up from there into the operation of creative evolution becuase he alone holds and knows you as the leading agent of his creative function. 
2888 :A11 (that I ay i n P ral aya) sti rred at the emergence of the universal mother's womb, unproliferous though, brought into being, and proclaimed otherwise: 'It is the vital proliferous Vasha, divine Shakti, inspired with the creative potentials of Brahma who alone is her coexistent consort.' Brahma alone who is the director and inspirer of this Vasha is really the One who creates the dynamic creative complementaries of evolutionary existence. In this evolution, yajnas, cycles of consumption and creation, become the media of the evolution-journey, and Vasha becomes the watchful controller of the direction of these creative yajnas which take evolution to the destination. 
2889 :Vasha, the cosmic cow, takes up and carries on theyajna of life, Vasha takes up and sustains the sun, in Vasha is the food of life along with the implict Sages say immortality is Vasha, they say and honour that destruction and death too is Vasha, Vasha is this all, Devas, humans, demons, sustaining Pitaras, Rshis. Allis mutation of Vasha. 
2890 :Onewho would know thisof Vasha would know and realise the wholeness and versatility of divine potential which is Vasha. This way, also, yajna, comprehensive, undisturbed and uninterrupted, brings total fulfilment to the generous yajamana. 
2891 :In the mouth of Varuna, comprehending Brahma, there are three tongues: Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, shining. The middle one is the most shining. That is Vasha, dynamic power that controls change, evolution and completive destination. 
2892 :Fourfold is the living vitality of Vasha: Dynamics, one fourth; immortality, one fourth; yajna, one fourth; living forms, one fourth. 
2893 :Vasha is the heaven of light, Vasha is earth, Vasha is all pervasive Vishnu, also Prajapati. Realised sages, Vasus who sustain, all live by Mother Vasha's milk of life. 
2894 :Having drunk of themilk of Vasha, self-realised sages and Vasus, who abide under the protective umbrella of Infinite Brahma, realise and worship its milk and illumination. 
2895 :Some realise and rejoice in her peace and pleasure of Soma, others worship the ghrta, graciousness. Those who know and communicate the spirit of Vasha to the discipie scholar realise the heavenly bliss of the three heavens of light, individual, social and divine. 
2896 :Having gifted Vasha to the Brahmanas, man attains to all regions of light and joy, the laws of Rtam in it, Brahma and tapa, highest discipline of life. 
2897 :The Devas live for and by Vasha. H umans live by and for Vasha. Vasha in mutation has become all this that is and will last till the sun shines. 
2898 :(With Original Sanskrit Text, Transliteration & Lucid English Translation in the Aarsh Tradition of Maharshi Yaska and Swami Dayananda) No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, printing, emailing, online storage, link sharing, file-copying or otherwise without prior written permission of Agniveer. 
2899 :This digital edition is for single individual use only. Please purchase additional licenses for use by more than one person. 
2900 :Your cooperation will help us bring more gems of Indian culture to forefront and support the cause of humanity. 
2901 :Arise, Agni, manifest into creative activity, this Aditi, mastered and energised by Providence, seeking progeny, prepares and matures the holy food for Brahma with desire. And those seven sages, creators of the forms of being, alongwith certain created forms stir and churn you to come up into creative activity. 
2902 :(Agni is a term of vesatile meaning, from the leading light and creative will of the universe upto the creative passion of the intelligent soul of the individual, always playing a leading role in the situation. It means Ishvara, or the Samrat who is world leader and ruler, or Raja, national leader and ruler, or any head of an institution or organisation, or head of the family. Aditi would mean the consort power, Prakrti, earth, motherland, the people, members of the institution or organisation, lady of the house, the body with sense and mind. Creative activity would mean positive progress of the world, country, society, institution, organisation, family, the individual. Seven sages would mean creative and cooperative forces : five elements with Ahankara and Mahat mutations of Prakrti in the cosmic context, seven pranic energies in the biological context, ministers and advisors, law and order and defence forces in the socio-political context, five senses with will and judgement in the individual context. In short, Agni is the creative passion and power, Aditi is the consort, seven sages are the auxiliaries, and Brahmaudana is the food and the state of nature just mature for creation. 
2903 :A word about churning (manth) and food (odana): All change of form comes into being when Prakrti from the state of constancy is activated into the state of mutability by divine will. From Satyam, Prakrti becomes Satyam-and-Rtam. Rtam is the law of mutability through which the changing world of new forms becomes a mutation of Satyam. In other words, Satyam and Rtam, coustancy and mutability are two sides of the same thing. Just as two pieces of arani wood produce fire by attrition, so does Prakrti produce new forms by the ‘churning’ process of Satyam and Rtam. 
2904 :Now food: In Prashna Upanishad the disciple asks the first question: How do different forms of being come into existence: The reply: Prajapati, with the desire to create, created Prana, life energy, and Rayi, food. Prana is the consumer, Rayi, is the food consumed, the result is new forms of being. In this Sukta, in this mantra, Aditi is the consort with desire, she prepares the food for Brahma, that is, she brings up the seed state with desire. And no plant is born unless the seed is consumed. In this way, the entire process of change and creative evolution is concentrated in this mantra: Consumption, transformation, creation. 
2905 :O generous friends, brave performers, light the fire, let the flames arise and holy words resound without hate and enmity to anyone. This Agni is a brave warrior, throws out the enemies but never for malice or jealousy. It is by Agni that the Devas, positive powers of love, nobility and creativity, challenge and defeat the negative forces and win over the enemies. 
2906 :O Agni, universal light and leader of humanity, co-existent with all that is bom, you are bom and you arise for great performance and glorious victories, and for the maturity and perfection of the food for enlightenment leading to the attainment of Brahma. Seven sagely powers who create higher and higher forms of being have created and consecrated you. Pray create and bless this nation of humanity with wealth, honour and excellence, all worthy of the brave. 
2907 :O Agni, eminent scholar, all knowing power and presence lighted and inspired with homage by devotees, rise and shine by the homage and recognition offered, and as you shine, bring in adorable divinities here on the vedi. O Jataveda, preparing and offering the right homage and hospitality for them, pray raise this yajamana and this nation to the peace and pleasure of the highest state of light and bliss. 
2908 :ifsjT ^rnf Pi Ism mo g^ftt Im^um h <-41 i hi 3f?nWr4fs4 f4 •o'miPM di-cA zjf %ctrt pt fm Mlhitlld II V, II The three-way shares of life’s gifts meant for Devas, Pitaras and mortal humanity, fixed and set apart since all time earlier, know you all that, and those shares I award to each one of you separately in full measure. Of these, that which is the share of Devas will save and lead this nation to fulfilment till the end of the journey. 
2909 :Agni, steadfast challenger, you are the winner, conqueror, superior to all. Keep down under control all jealous and inimical adversaries. Let this homage of ours, planned, measured and continuously assessed and revised, strengthen you to win over your rivals in conflict so as to offer you homage of cooperation in friendship. 
2910 :Agni, Samrat of the world of humanity, come up with your equals and cooperators with plenty of food, milk and water. Raise this humanity to do great deeds of honour for splendour and excellence. High and great as you are, rise to the height of peace, prosperity and happiness, the state of life which people call paradisal bliss. 
2911 :Let this great humanity and this great earth, brilliant, divine and blessed at heart, wear a beautiful form and find a stable seat and settlement in peace, and then we would rise to the state of holy action and paradisal bliss. 
2912 :O lady of the house of Order, O nation of humanity, take up and use these complementary soma stones, place them on the stable floor of the Order’s Yajna, crush well the filaments of soma for nectar juice for the yajamana, the Samrat. Take up the mortar and pestle to pound the paddy for the nation, striking down those that rise to attack this nation and raising the people to prosperity. 
2913 :Brave hero, holding as you are the two efficient soma grinders of complementarity in celebrative action, let the noble Devas, loved and adorable, come and join you in your creative programme. And, of the three gifts of action, honour and splendour of joyous success and prosperity, I make it possible for you to achieve as much as you choose to have. 
2914 :This is your land of birth. This is your throught, knowledge and culture, your very being and identity. Let this inviolable earth, mother of the brave, own, hold and sustain you. Sift them all out, like chaff from the grain, who pollute, damage and violate her. Create and give her wealth, honour and excellence all worthy of the brave. 
2915 :Sit you all together for a higher life of values and vitality, compare the grain with the chaff, discriminate, judge and make your choice. Let us exceed our equals in honour, excellence and grace. 
2916 :I throw down under all those forces which hate and malign us. 
2917 :O women, rise high, go far and come back home soon. Let the assembly for collective action and policy raise you high for full achievement and self-fulfilment. Of those actions take up those which, for you, are worthy of association and participation and, thinking patiently and intelligently, sift and leave the rest aside. 
2918 :O First Lady of the Order, these bright and gracious women have come. Rise and welcome them all enthusiastically. Noble wife of a noble husband, blessed mother of noble progeny, along with your husband and your children, a sacred yajnic occasion for good fellowship has come to you. Take up the jar of water and offer them the hospitality of welcome. 
2919 :Your share of action and energy, your share of Dharma with rights and duties integrated, which is ancient and eternal, is ordained, secured and preserved for you since eternity. O citizens of the world, fulfil these acts of personal and social obligations defined and ordained by the Rshis. This creative yajna of personal, social and divine ordinances is harbinger of the gifts of earth, progeny, wealth of life and a nation of the brave. 
2920 :Agni, leading light of life in the home, society and the world, may this holy vessel of yajnic offerings and this oblation into the sacred fire raise you high in life. Pure at heart, most highly dedicated to the fiery discipline of yajnic life, keep it up hot and sizzling with your heat of faith and relentless action. Let the devotees, dedicated to visionary sages and the divinities of nature and humanity, tempered in the crucibles of social discipline, having joined together, keep the fire burning, and, according to the seasons of time and place, offer their contribution to society. 
2921 :May these pure, consecrated, adorable gracious young women and their holy actions like gentle streams of water move to the sacred vessel to prepare the holy food for yajna for the community on way to divinity. May they give us noble progeny and plenty of wealth, and may those who prepare and perfect the food for divinity reach the regions of highest attainment in life. 
2922 :Sanctified with holy chant of Vedic verses, seasoned and refined with ghrta, are these tandulas, rice preparations, and filaments of soma, holy offerings meant for yajna, joining the divinities in the process. 
2923 :Let the holy vessel receive these for the oblations. O devoted men and women, having prepared these holy offerings and having made the offer rise and reach the regions of bliss and divine communion. 
2924 :O yajamana, noble support of thousands, with the preparation and offer of food for the divinities, rise and expand with greatness and glory in the field of holy work in the region of divine bliss. 
2925 :O Lord, presiding presence of Divinity, grandparents, parents, children, children’s children, we are fifteen, and I , preparing and offering the food for you. 
2926 :Support of thousands, streaming forth in a hundred showers, unhurt and undiminished is Brahmaudana, food for divinities, the path of divines to the regions of bliss. I sustain all those around me along with their progeny who bear homage to you, O Lord, move and inspire all these, be kind and gracious for my sake so that we all are able to offer the homage of Brahmaudana. 
2927 :Rise and raise the Vedi, raise and advance these homage bearers with progeny, strike off the destroyers, lead this noble community farther on way to progress. Let us all be equal and higher with honour, excellence and grace. 
2928 :I keep the jealous and the malignants down under control of the force of law. 
2929 :Turn and meet this people with wealth. Come with divinities and be with them. Let no ordeal of imprecation touch you. Let no sabotage injure and afflict you. Rule and shine in your own dominion free from affliction and ailment. 
2930 :O First Lady of the Dominion, before you is Brahmaudana vedi, made according to the dynamic laws of Truth, designed with the vision and thought of mind, ordained and provided since time immemorial. Pure, protective and adorable it is, keep it high up before you and have it provided with food for the divinities and human enlightenment therein. 
2931 :This ladle, which seven Rshis, dynamic formative forces of nature, makers of material forms of the world, constituted and formed as the second service hand of inviolable mother Prakrti, and which is familiar with all parts and particles of Odana, yajnic food, may this ladel collect, concentrate and offer the fragrant oblation into the vedi (through the First Lady of the Order). 
2932 :O yajnic food for the fire and the participants, well prepared and seasoned in delicious form, may the priests and participants of divine interests come and sit by you. Please them, seasoned and sanctified as you are with soma. Satisfy their appetite and see that the sagely receivers do not experience any want or dissatisfaction. 
2933 :O Soma, self-refulgent sweetness of the food of divine yajna, O brilliant ruler of the land of peace and beautiful life, create and spread the light of comprehensive knowledge and spiritual elevation for the Brahma-loving priests and participants, howsoever may they be sitting around you. Dedicated host, lover of yajna, I call upon the Rshis and the dedicated disciples of the Rshis risen through tapas, discipline of Brahmacharya austerity, to the yajna of divine homage and human enlightenment. 
2934 :These young maidens, virgins pure, sanctified through the discipline of education, adorable like sacred waters of yajna, I assign unto the hands of Brahma- graduates, one for one singly. Whatever desire and purpose of life I entertain, consecrate and expect of you, may Indra, ruler of the vibrant nation, fulfil for me. (This mantra refers to the sacred institution of marriage for the fulfilment of a holy social purpose, the married girl being prepared as the first lady of the home and family order in Grhastha Ashrama yajna. Swami Dayananda writes in Satyartha Prakasha that teachers can play — not that they do and must — an important role in the young people’s selection of their life partner since they know their nature, character, interests and behaviour from personal contact during the disciples’ stay in the homely institute of education in their respective Gurukuls. 
2935 :The mantra may also be interpreted as a divine dispensation so far as the institution of marriage is concerned.) and matured from the field of existence, the food of life which, like the mother cow, fulfils my desire and purpose of living. This is the wealth I assign and entrust to the Brahmanas, dedicated to knowledge and enlightenment. Thus do I create the paradisal path among the pitaras, parental sustainers of the people, and the life around. 
2936 :(The mantra may also be interpreted literally in relation to food production and maintenance of the intellectuals who preserve and advance knowledge.) Put the chaff into the fire. Throw away the husk. We have heard that the chaff is the share of the home fire, and we know that the husk is the share of the earth. 
2937 :O Lord, know that who toils to produce, who cooks and serves, and that who distils the essence. Raise him on the path that leads to paradisal bliss so that, having realised the best of life, he may rise to the highest state of bliss and the divine presence of Brahma. 
2938 :Organising priest of yajna, O Adhvaryu, unlock the entry to the heart of divinity in the mind, cleanse the vessel of junk, make room for grace and ghrta, knowing as you do the process of communion. Anoint all the limbs of body and mind with the ghrta of love and grace, and know thus it is I make the path among parental sustainers of life to lead you to paradisal bliss in divinity. 
2939 :O protector of yajna, rich in ghrta and grace, keep off the negative forces of arrogance opposed to lovers of divinity, whosoever they be around you. And see that those, who love positivity, bear and enjoy the food for yajna, rise and expand in knowledge and are dedicated to the sages close to you, never come to harm. 
2940 :O Odana, food for yajnic enlightenment and the divinities, here I establish you among the sages and the disciples of divinity. Of those opposed to the sages, divinities and positive visionaries of life, there is none here. The food is ripe and ready. Agni, leading light, is the protector, so are the vibrant youth of the nation and all divinities of nature and humanity. They would protect and promote the food of life for enlightenment for us. 
2941 :O Lord, let us always abide with you, perpetual giver of the showers of yajna, harbinger of happy, healthy, growing humanity, land and cows, culture and education, treasure of honour and excellence, progeny and people, immortality, long life with expansive wealth and glories of existence. 
2942 :O Yajna, meeting of the human and divine, you are Vrshabha, giver of the showers of prosperity, leading to the paradisal bliss of life. Be moving and bless the sages and their followers and disciples. Establish us in the life of the performers of holy action where there is the gracious life for both you and me. 
2943 :O Agni, leading light of humanity, create and prepare pioneering paths of life worthy of divine souls, leading to Divinity. Move together by them and collect a tally of noble deeds. By these noble acts, let us rise and reach the adorable lord of yajna abiding in the state of the sevenfold rainbow beauty of light and divine bliss. 
2944 :By the light by which divine souls rose to the state of heavenly light and, having prepared and offered the homage of noble deeds to Divinity, ascended to the rewarding region of noble performance, by that very light and those very noble deeds performed as homage, we too would rise to the rewarding region of holy action, rising still higher and higher to the state of divine light and reach the highest bliss over every thing else. 
2945 :The subject of this hymn is Bhava-Sharva- Rudra: Integration-disintegration-Reintegration, principle of the process of divine evolution of the world of diversity from the integrated state of Prakrtic equilibrium and mergence of the world of diversity back into the state of integration and equilibrium. 
2946 :Further, Integration-disintegration-Reintegra- tion is a simultaneous process of consumption and creation in the evolutionary process. (Kathopanishad, 1 , 1 , 6 ) The one deity which represents this seemingly dual process in one form is Rudra which, in relation to human experience and response, has a seemingly dual character, being terrible for reasons of disintegration, and benevolent for reasons of creation and re-creation through re-integration. In actuality the deity is one: Bhava-Sharva-Rudra. 
2947 :O Bhava and Sharva, be kind and gracious, do not assail us, come and protect us. O lords of forms in existence, O lords of living forms, homage of salutations to you. Do not shoot the arrow fixed upon the bow with the string drawn. Pray do not destroy our people and our animals. 
2948 :Sune krostre ma sanrani kartamaliklavebhyo grdhrebhyo ye ca krsna avisyavah. Maksikaste pasupate vayamsi te vighase ma vidanta. 
2949 :Let our bodies be not disposed to dogs, jackals, clamorous birds, vultures or black crows. O lord of living beings, let not your flies or insects or birds get on to feed upon our bodies. (Let no unnatural death befall us). 
2950 :O Bhava, lord creator of forms of existence, O Rudra, lord of life and death, salutations to you for the inevitable call, for the pranic gift of life, for all your evolutionary powers. O lord immortal of infinite unbounded eyes, we offer you homage of worship and obedience with submission of the will. 
2951 :We do you homage from the front, from above and below, salutations to you from all round over the heavens of light and to you as the entire space itself. 
2952 :O Pashupati, lord of living forms, O Bhava, lord of existence and creation, homage of worship to you, to your face as the universe is, your eyes that the infinite stars are. Salutations to you, beautiful and beatific cover of existence as you are, and salutations to you for your direct manifestation in the universe. 
2953 :Salutations to you for all your universal limbs of the cosmos: for your belly as the space is, for your tongue that nature is as it proclaims your presence in action, for your mouth as it consumes old forms and materials for new creations, for your teeth and jaws as you crush things for justice and transformation, and homage to your fragrance that the flowers are. 
2954 :Let us never try to war upon Rudra, the archer, lord of dark clouds across the skies, all-watching with a thousand eyes, all victorious lord of ultimate speed of natural evolution, and destroyer of the violent. 
2955 :May Bhava protect us all round. As water protects against fire and fire protects against freezing waters, so may Bhava protect us against contradictions. May Bhava never destroy us. Homage of worship be to Bhava. 
2956 :Four ways, four times, homage to Bhava, lord creator of forms of life, eight times, ten times homage of worship be to you, O Bhava. All these five forms of living beings, varied each in its own way, cows, horses, humans, goats and sheep are yours. 
2957 :Yours are these four quarters of space. The heaven is yours, the earth is yours, and yours is this vast refulgent region of light. Yours is all this that lives as soul in body, which breathes and lives on earth. 
2958 :This vast and boundless treasure-hold of the wealth of the universe is yours in which abide all the worlds of existence. O Pashupati, our homage to you! Pray be kind and gracious to us. Let all ominous dogs and jackals be away. Let all howling hags with floating hair get off from here. 
2959 :O Rudra, lord of the blue locks of clouds and oceans of space, you wield the colourful golden bow of infinite reach that touches thousands and kills hundreds at a stroke. Homage and salutations to this thunderous blow of the divine arrow of Rudra wherever in whatever direction from here it reaches and operates. 
2960 :Whoever the target of the strike, if he tries to evade and escape and thus render you ineffectual, you follow and overtake him as a hunter tracks the prey by the pugmarks. 
2961 :Bhava and Rudra, maker and breaker, both together, both simultaneously operative, both bright and unsparing, act together to realise their power and purpose of divine creative evolution. Homage and salutations to them wherever in whatever direction from here they be operating. 
2962 :Salutations to you, Rudra, as you come and emerge into consciousness, salutations to you as you go from consciousness, salutations to you as you stay by as long as you do, and salutations to you as you abide in the consciousness in steady presence. 
2963 :Salutations in the evening, salutations in the morning, salutations at night, salutations in the day. Salutations to Bhava and Sharva, I offer salutations to both together simultaneously. 
2964 :Let us never relent in our praise and adoration of Rudra in words, all pervasive, all watching lord with a thousand eyes, dispelling darkness and injustice upfront, all wise and omniscient in universal ways. 
2965 :Let us at first hand know and realise this Rudra, lord of all colourful powers and possibilities, all attractive, free, gracious dispenser of justice and mercy, at the same time terrible and blazing even in excess of the chariot of the refulgent sun. Homage of salutations Pray do not strike the punitive bolt of divine displeasure upon us. Pray be not angry, O Pashupati. Homage and salutations to you. Let the celestial lightning strike elsewhere away from us. 
2966 :Pray do not hurt us. Speak to us, advise and admonish. Spare us the violence and cruelty of nature. Pray do not be angry with us. And we would never violate your law and life’s discipline. 
2967 :Pray do not covet to deprive us of our cows, our people, our sheep and goats. O lord of passion and punishment, let your strike fall elsewhere. Strike the forces of hate and violence, strike their manpower. 
2968 :Whose natural strike is fever and cough which comes to a person like the neighing of a powerful horse as if it has hit upon the offender in advance: Salutations and homage to this controller of nature’s order. 
2969 :He that abides firmly in the middle region, punishing those that neglect yajna and ignore the divinities, to that lord of nature, homage and salutations tenfold ten times with Shakvari verses. 
2970 :Wild animals, deer and other beasts collectively living in the forest, swans, eagles, vultures and crows, all do homage to you. O Pashupati, your adorable spirit rolls in the waters. For you, in your adoration, for your exaltation celestial showers rain down and bless the earth. 
2971 :Whale, serpent, tortoise, crocodile, fish, and the constellations of stars for which you move light and energy with the Rajas potential of nature, all these are neither far from you nor without you anywhere. Bhava, lord of Being and Becoming, you instantly and simultaneously see them all and you see the earth and the entire universe, and you raise and evolve things from the lower and former forms into the latter and higher forms in the world of existence. 
2972 :(Professor Vishwanatha Vidyalankara has explained the natural creative names as constellations of stars with astronomical evidence in his commentary on this mantra.) O Rudra, afflict us not with the fever of life, nor with poison, nor with fire and lightning from above. Let this lightning strike elsewhere from us. 
2973 :Bhava, lord of Being and Becoming, rules the heaven, Bhava rules the earth, Bhava pervades and rules the vast middle regions. Homage and salutations to him from us here wherever in whichever direction or quarter of space he be. 
2974 :O Bhava, ruler of earth and heaven and the middle regions, be kind and gracious to the yajamana, you are the ruler and protector of all the living forms of existence. Whoever has faith that the Devas, Bhava and divinities of nature and humanity, are there and pervasive, be kind and gracious to him for his people and for his cattle wealth. 
2975 :O Rudra, hurt not our seniors, hurt not our child, hurt not him that bears that responsibility of the home and family, hurt not him that would bear the responsibility of the home and family, hurt not our father and our mother, and pray do not hurt our own body and mind. Pray be kind and gracious to all of us. Our body and mind is your own, your gift. 
2976 :To the uprorious, instantaneous and loudest warning waking voices of Rudra, I have done the homage and recognition due. 
2977 :(For this mantra cross-reference may be made to Swami Dayananda’s and Satavalekara’s commentary on Rgveda, 1, 161, 13.) Divine Rudra, homage to your proclamatory warning forces, homage to your pioneering forces of light, fire and lightning, homage to your forces of the thunderbolt, homage to your consumptive-creative forces, homage, O Lord, to all your evolutionary forces. 
2978 :Pray let there be security, freedom from fear, and all round well being for us. 
2979 :This Sukta has 56 mantras in all, divided over three paryayas or parts: the first part comprises 31 mantras (1-31), the second part comprises 18 mantras (32-49), and the third part comprises seven mantras (50- 56). 
2980 :‘Odana’ means ‘anna’, ‘food’, food for body, mind and soul. Physical food is food for the body, intellecutual food is food for the mind, and spiritual food, the spirit itself, both individual and universal, atma and Brahma, is food for the spirit. Reference back may be made to Atharva, 4, 35, 1-7. 
2981 :Paryaya One offers the symbolic correspondence between Brahma and ordinary physical food: Brahma, the living, breathing, intelligent, organismic, sovereign cosmic Purusha which is the highest object of meditation is food of the spirit, and physical food at the ordinary human level, food for the body. 
2982 :Of that Odana, Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe and of the divine Veda, is the head, and Brahma, Veda, and Brahmana is the mouth, i.e., the mouthpiece, Dyava-Prthivi, heaven and earth, are the ears, sun and moon are the eyes, and seven sages, i.e., seven stars of Ursa Major are the pranic energies, i.e., five pranas, sutratma and Dhananjaya Vayu. 
2983 :Chakshu, divine will and vision, is the pestle, and Kama, creative desire, is the mortar. 
2984 :Diti, Prakrti in the mutable state of existence, is the winnowing basket, Aditi, Prakrti as the constant base of mutability,is the winnower, and wind is the agent that separates the grain from the chaff. 
2985 :Horses are the grains, cows are the clean rice, flies and mosquitoes, the chaff. 
2986 :Lead is its ash, gold is its colour, and the lotus flower is its fragrance. 
2987 :The threshing floor is its receptacle, two splints are its shoulders, and two poles are its spines. 
2988 :This earth is the pan for the boiling of rice, and the heaven is its cover. 
2989 :The furrows are its ribs, and the sand is content of the stomach. 
2990 :The cooking pan is placed on the fire by the yajna-performer with the chant of Rks... 
2991 :...Covered with flames of Samans, it has been taken off with the hymns of Atharva-veda. 
2992 :Brhat-Samans are mixers of rice and water in the pan, and Rathantara Samans, the ladle to stir. 
2993 :Seasons are the cooks and seasonal fuel and fragrances, the food of fire. 
2994 :The heat of fire heats up the cauldron with five openings as the solar fire heats up the earth (mantra 11) for the ripening of grain. 
2995 :Through preparation, maturation and experiential assimilation are realised all the facts, worlds and the Spirit of existence defined in the yajnic words of Vedic meditation. 
2996 :It is that Brahmaudana, food for the spirit , in which are sustained the earth, heaven and the middle region of oceanic antariksha, the three worlds from the closest earth to the farthest high, which is the heaven of light. 
2997 :It is that Brahmaudana in the transcendent state of which, over the immanent presence, divine sages experience and enjoy six kinds of meditative food of divine ecstasy. 
2998 :(‘Arka’, divine presence, is the food of Devas: Shatapatha, 12, 8, 1, 2. And Ashiti is anna, food: Shatapatha, 8, 5, 2, 17. Reference may be made to Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras, I, 17-18, 42-45, and 49 and 51 for Savikalpa, Nirvikalpa, Savichara, Nirvichara Samadhi upto the Alinga state of Prakrti, Purusha Vishesha, and ultimately the Nirvishesha Nirodha Samadhi. This is the divine food for the spirit.) Great as is the glory of this Odana, food for the spirit, of that I ask you. Pray enlighten me. 
2999 :He would say: Not little is this, nor is there no shower of bliss, nor that it is only this much, nor wonder what it is. (In other words, one who knows it knows it only in experience, but cannot define what it is, how much it is. There is a wise man’s saying: If you ask me, I know not; if you don’t ask me, I know. I know but I can’t say.) As much as the Giver pleases to give ... don’t under-estimate, don’t understate, don’t say it should The seeker scholars of Brahma say: Did you eat of the Odana that is farthest out or that which is at the closest within ? (The ‘farthest’ Barhma is veiled in the objective world of Prakrti, and the ‘closest’ is within the heart core in the essence (Brhadaranyakopanishad, 2, 3, 1; Kathopanishad, 2,4,1; Yajurveda 40,6; Ishopanishad, 6). 
3000 :If you ate the remote Odana, i.e., if you are lost in the external world, then the pranas, i.e., life-sustaining energies (Yajurveda, 17, 71) will forsake you. So says the master, (because the external world will eat you). 
3001 :dedicated to Brahma within the heart core, apana, the cause of death (Aitareyopanishad, 1, 2, 4), will forsake you. So says the master. 
3002 :Neither have I eaten the (external) Odana, nor has the (external) Odana eaten me. 
3003 :In fact Odana itself has eaten Odana. (The question of the eater and the eaten remains as long as the duality of the two, subject and object, remains. In the state of communion and union, the duality goes away. Brahma which, in the state of duality, was the Odana, or food of the Yogi for the spirit, now, in the state of union, has taken up the meditative soul as its own self or child (Yogasutras, 1, 3 and 41; and Gita, 4, 24 and 9, 16. The two are one, indistinguishable, the duality is gone.) In this part, from mantra 32 to 49, the symbolic correspondence between Brahmaudana, spiritual food, and physical food for the body is obvious, and yet subtle because it points out how physical food too should be taken in the wide perspective of nature and the lord of nature, the Supreme Brahma. The correspondence follows from mantra 31 which says that Odana itself eats Odana, i.e., the subject and the object are in communion, not separate. Therefore the communion should be essential and spontaneous, not out of greed, desperation, aversion or necessity. If the human receives the food, physical or divine, out of compulsion, the human is not fully human, there is something wanting. Completion, perfection and fulfilment of the human is only in the union with divine. 
3004 :For that reason, if you eat of this Odana by any other head, i.e., with any other thought, intention and faith, than that by which the ancient Rshis ate and internalised this divine food, then your people and progeny from the eldest onwards would be lost, so said the master to the disciple. 
3005 :And so I eat of the Odana, the divine food in meditation, neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor out of necessity as it is discordant. I have eaten it with Brhaspati, i.e., with the highest thought and faith. I have eaten it with that, by that I And this Odana is complete in all aspects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and eats thus becomes complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, perfect whole in body, mind and soul. 
3006 :For that reason, if you eat, i.e., experience this Odana by any other ears than those by which the ancient Rshis perceived and internalised this divine presence and the Word, then you will become deaf, the words would be lost, so said the master to the disciple. 
3007 :And so I experience the Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor out of necessity as it is within or discordant. I have experienced it from heaven and earth with the ears. I have received it from them with them, from them and And this Odana is complete in all aspects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and perceives thus becomes complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, perfect whole in body, mind and soul. 
3008 :For that reason, if you experience this Odana by any other eyes than those by which the ancient Rshis perceived and internalised it, then you would become blind to it, so said the master to the disciple. 
3009 :And so I perceive this Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within or discordant. I have perceived it from them with them, from them and by them I have obtained it. 
3010 :And this Odana is complete in all aspects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and perceives thus becomes complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body, mind and soul. 
3011 :For that reason, if you eat, speak of, this Odana by any other tongue than that by which the ancient Rshis ate, internalised and spoke of it, then by word and mouth your people would be lost for words, so said the master to the disciple. 
3012 :And so I eat, speak of, this Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it from the divine mouth. By divine mouth I have experienced and spoken of it, from that and by that I have obtained it. 
3013 :perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and thus receives it becomes complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body, mind and soul. 
3014 :For that reason, if you taste of this Odana by any other palatentham that by which the ancient Rshis tasted and internalised it, your taste will go down lifeless, thus spoke the master to the disciple. 
3015 :And so I taste of this Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I receive it from the flame of fire. By that tongue of fire I taste it and by that I obtain it. 
3016 :And this Odana is complete in all aspects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and thus receives it becomes complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in For that reason, if you eat of this Odana by any other teeth than those by which the ancient Rshis ate of it, then your teeth would fall off, thus spoke the master to the disciple. 
3017 :And so I eat of this Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it with the teeth in accordance with the seasons. With those teeth, by those seasons, I have eaten of it, and with those teeth according to the seasons I have obtained it. 
3018 :And this Odana is complete in all aspects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and receives it thus becomes complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in Tatascainamanyaih pranapanaih prasiryai- scaitam purva rsayah prdsnan. Pranapanastva hdsyantityenamdha. Tam vd aham nhrvahcam na parahcam na pratyahcam. Saptarsibhih pranapanaih. Tairenarh prasisam tairenamaji- gamam. Esa vd odanah sarvahgah sarvaparuh sarvatanuh. Sarvahga eva sarvaparuh satyatanuh sam bhavati ya evam veda. 
3019 :For that reason, if you eat and assimilate this Odana by any other prana-apanas than those by which the ancient Rshis ate and assimilated it, then prana- apanas would forsake you, thus spoke the master to the disciple. 
3020 :And so I eat and assimilate the Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it by the seven sages, that is, by five senses, mind and intelligence with prana-apanas. By these I have eaten it, by these I have obtained it. 
3021 :And this Odana is complete in all aspects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and thus obtains it becomes complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in For that reason, if you eat of this odana with any other view of self-expansion than that which the ancient Rshis had for eating it, then cancerous suffering will destroy you, so said the master to the disciple. 
3022 :And so I eat of this Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I take it with the vastness of the spaces in view as was the sages’ view. With that I eat it, by that I obtained it. 
3023 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and thus obtains it becomes complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3024 :For that reason, if you eat of this Odana with any other sense of settlement and security than the purpose which the ancient Rshis had while they ate it, then Vidyut, cosmic energy, itself would destroy you, thus spake the master to the disciple. 
3025 :And so I eat of this Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I eat it with the sense of divine light and universal security and settlement. Thereby I ate it, thereby I obtained it. 
3026 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect in body form. He that knows this and thus receives becomes complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3027 :rsayah prdsnan. Krsyd na ratsyasityenamdha. Tam va aham narvancam na pardncam na pratyancam. Prthivyorasa. Tenainam prdsisam tenainamajigamam. Esa vd odanah sarvdngah sarvaparuh sarvatanuh. Sarvdhga eva sarvaparuh sarvatanuh sarh bhavati ya evam veda. 
3028 :For that reason, if you eat of this Odana with any other love and desire of the heart than the love and desire with which the ancient Rshis ate it, then you will fail to grow by your farming, thus spake the master to the disciple. 
3029 :And so I eat of this Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it from the breast of the earth with her love and patience. With that I have experienced it and with that I have obtained it. 
3030 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3031 :For that reason, if you taste of that Odana with any other stomach and hunger than that with which the ancient Rshis tasted it, then abdominal pain of insatiety will destroy you, thus spake the master to the disciple. 
3032 :And so I taste of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it with that sagely hunger for truth. With that I have eaten of it, with that I have obtained it. 
3033 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3034 :For that reason, if you eat of that Odana with any other passion and ambition than that with which the ancient Rshis ate of it, you will drown and die in the depth of its waters, thus spake the master to the disciple. 
3035 :And so I eat of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it with the ambitious depth and vastness of the sea and space. With that ambition and that vastness of mind I have eaten of it and with that I have obtained it. 
3036 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. He that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3037 :yivn'n Ifr#rqTF I rT cTT 3Tt Hlcjfd "T MJl'd 'T yr^lWm rydld^'JIdl-EN'b'^rfTT I cTiWCh y i R> i 1 n wr^i'fH^Jwqj t^t cjt arfc^T: w4\$: And for that reason, if you eat of that Odana with any other thighs and lustrous vitality than that with which the ancient Rshis ate of it, then both your thighs will be devitalised, thus said the master to the disciple. 
3038 :And so I eat of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it from the light, lustre and vitality of the vast sun and moon. With that light and virility I have eaten of it, and with that I have obtained it. 
3039 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3040 :And for that reason, if you eat of that Odana with any other knees and forelegs for steadiness than those with which the ancient Rshis ate of it, then you will become lame, so said the master to the disciple. 
3041 :And so I eat of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it with the steadiness of the knees and forelegs of Tvashta, i.e., divine knowledge of nature’s constructive power. With that I have eaten of it, and with that I have obtained it. 
3042 :And this Odana, this knowledge and steadiness is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and thus receives becomes complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3043 :For that reason, if you eat of that Odana with any other feet for firmness than those with which the ancient Rshis ate of it, then you will end up as a wanderer, so said the master to the disciple. 
3044 :And so I eat of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it with the movememt of the Ashvins, complementary currents of natural energy. With that I have eaten of it, with that I have obtained it. 
3045 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all limbs, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3046 :For that reason, if you eat of that Odana with any other forefeet than those with which the ancient Rshis ate of it, the snake will bite and kill you, so said the master to the disciple. 
3047 :And so I eat of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it with the first forefeet, i.e., the first rays of Savita, the sun. With those I have eaten of it, with those I have obtained it. 
3048 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. 
3049 :For that reason if you eat of that Odana with any other hands than with those with which the ancient Rshis ate of it, you will violate the Brahmana in you and the spirit and value of knowledge and culture in society: Thus spoke the master to the disciple. 
3050 :And so I eat of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I have received it with the hands of the laws of life’s dynamics and divine truth. With that truth I eat of it, with that I have obtained it. 
3051 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect For that reason, if you eat of that Odana with any Pratishtha, foundation, peace and stability in the totality of existence, other than that with which the ancient Rshis ate of it you will die unsettled and homeless, without rest and peace, thus spoke the master to the disciple. 
3052 :And so I eat of that Odana neither greedily as it is closest, nor desperately as it is farthest, nor of necessity as it is within and discordant. I eat of it with settlement in truth. With that truth and settlement I have obtained it. 
3053 :And this Odana is complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect whole in body form. And he that knows this and thus receives grows complete in all respects, perfect in all parts, and perfect This Brahmaudana is the summit gateway to the presence of Brahma. 
3054 :One that knows this rests on top of the presence of Brahma in Brahma-loka. 
3055 :And with this Odana and from this Odana, Prakrti and Prakrti’s divine knowledge, Prajapati created the world of thirty-three divinities (eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, cosmic energy, and Yajna of evolution). 
3056 :For the knowledge of these divinities Prajapati, created the evolutionary yajna and revealed the process. 
3057 :One who becomes a close observer of the knower controls his pranic energy for divine realisation, but one who ignores and treats the knower with negligence and indifference violates his pranic energy. 
3058 :And not only does he violate his pranic energy, he is also deprived of his life’s wealth and property. 
3059 :And not only is he deprived of his life’s wealth and property, even pranic energy forsakes him long before his full ripe age. 
3060 :Prana is the basic energy of life from the root to the top. Body and senses receive their sustenance from Prana (Chhandogya Upanishad 5,1,1-15). Prana receives its life energy from the atman (Prashna Upanishad, 3), and the ultimate prana of the universal life is Para- matman (Manusmrti, 12, 123, and Yajurveda, 23, 3). 
3061 :Homage to prana within whose power and control this entire world of existence breathes and vibrates. Prana is eternal, ruling lord over all, in which this entire universe is established and sustained. 
3062 :O Prana, life of life, homage to you for the roar, homage to you for the thunder. Homage to you, Prana, for the lightning, homage to you as you shower with the waters of life. 
3063 :When Prana with thunder and lightning roars, herbs are animated and fertilised, they bear the embryo of life, grow and are born manifold. 
3064 :When the season is come and Prana roars toward the herbs and trees, then all that is on earth rejoices and When Prana showers with torrents of rain on the great earth, then all living beings rejoice: there is going to be great plenty of food and prosperity, they celebrate. 
3065 :When showered over and regaled, herbs and trees speak to Prana together: You have given us life and more, you have given us all the beauty and fragrance of life. 
3066 :Homage to you, Prana, as you come in, homage to you as you go out, homage to you, Prana, held up within in Kumbhaka, homage to you, controlled and stabilised. 
3067 :Homage to you, Prana, moving as prana, the breath of life energy. Homage to you moving as apana, the cleanser of life, remover of impurities. Homage to you moving away, homage to you moving closer and within, this homage to you, all and universal. 
3068 :O Prana, homage to your energy body, dear to all. Homage to your higher energy body dearer to the yogins in meditation. And that energy of yours which is medicinal and health giving, of that give us a lot for a long and healthy life. (The dear here is Prey a, and the dearer is Shreya: Kathopanishad, 1, 2, 1-2.) Prana protects, promotes and abides by all forms of existence as father protects, promotes and abides by the child, as things are in the nature of life and love. Prana is the overall master, ruler and controller over all, all that breathe and all that breathe not. (Refer also to Prashnopanishad, 1, 4 ff.) Prano mrtyuh pranastakmapranam deva upasate. Prano ha satyavadinam uttame loka a dadhat. 
3069 :Prana is death, Prana is fever, senses honoured adore Prana. And Prana leads the man of truth of word and deed to the highest region of bliss and establishes him there. (Chhandogyopanishad, 5, 1, 14-15). 
3070 :Prana is Virat, refulgent and universal, Prana is the directive force of existence, all honour, adore and exalt Prana, Prana is sun, Prana is moon, and sages call Prana Prajapati. 
3071 :Prana is the breath of life and life’s cleansing force, Prana is rice, Prana is barley, and Prana is called the burden bearer of the world. Prana is concentrated in barley, and apana is called the rice grain. 
3072 :The human baby in the womb inhales Prana and exhales Apana. O Prana, when you have matured the foetus, the baby is born again. 
3073 :Prana is called Matarishva, air in the spatial region. Wind is called Prana. What was in the past, what is to be in future, and all that is abides in Prana. 
3074 :All herbs and medications which are Atharvani, meant for psychic cures, Angirasi, energising tonics and tranquilizers, all Daivi, meant for sensuous purposes, and all those prepared by people in laboratories grow and mature when, O Prana, you energise, vitalise and mature them. 
3075 :When Prana showers with torrents of rain on the great earth, then herbs and trees and all that is greenery germinate and grow luxuriantly. 
3076 :O Prana, whoever knows this of your power and vital energy, in whosoever you are established in a state of meditative stability, all bring him gifts of homage in that highest state of attainment. 
3077 :O Prana, dynamic, gracious and glorious, just as all these people bear and bring homage of praise, prayer and service to you, similarly they would bring homage of honour, reverence and recognition to him who would listen to you and follow your divine message. 
3078 :(It is to be noted here that the hymn to Prana is a hymn not only to divine life energy but also to Divinity Itself.) Prana, vibrant in the divinities, in the mind and senses, is active in the womb of life as well. That which was bom and manifest earlier is born and manifest again. It is past, present and future, all. The father pervades and manifests in the child with all his power and potentials, so does the universal father, Prana. 
3079 :The Swan, rising and flying from the lake, does not take one foot off (so that while one foot is in the air, the other stays on the ground). O dear, if it were to take off the other foot also, then there would be neither now nor after, neither today nor tomorrow, there would be neither night nor day, nor would anything shine again, not even the dawn. (That would be the end of time and the world of existence.) (For detailed study of this idea refer to Prashnopanishad, Questions 2, 3, and 4. But what happens when the world of existence recedes into the dark night of Annhilation, Pralaya? Refer Rgveda, 10, 129, 2: Even then One is awake with its own potential, the One Prana of Prana which breathes without air.) Prana, the Prana of Prana, all-comprehending presence and power like the felly of a wheel moves and turns the eight-wheeled, thousand axled chariot of the universe round and round, up and down, out and in. With half of its potential it creates the entire world of existence. What the other half is remains transcendent, highest pure bliss, self-existent omniscience. 
3080 :To that Prana which rules this world of infinite variety in existence and, in which, the world of all that thinks, wills and moves, which is the fastest existent dynamic power in all others, to such, O Prana, homage of adoration to you. 
3081 :That Prana which rules this world of infinite variety of existence, in it, the world of all that thinks, wills and moves, that which is relentlessly alert and constantly with Brahma, the same may ever abide with me. 
3082 :Prana is ever up and alert, keeps awake among those who go to sleep, and never lies down to rest. No one has ever heard of it that it too goes to sleep when others are sleeping. 
3083 :O Prana, pray never turn away from me. Never be alien to me, never alienate me. In order to live a vibrant life, I take you on unto me in bond as the very source of the generation of life’s action and enthusiasm. 
3084 :This sukta covers the basic discipline of the first phase of life which is Brahmacharya. This is the period of preparation for life with dedication to Brahma, comprehensive knowledge of nature, human society and Divinity, and austere, not indulgent, discipline of living for the development of body, mind and spirit. 
3085 :The Sukta is relevant to both boys and girls as is clear from mantra 18. But the word ‘Brahmachari’, like the word ‘Atman’, is masculine gender grammatically, the pronoun used for “Brahmachari’ is ‘he’which does not rule out the Brahmacharini, ‘she’. Brhmacharya and education is necessary and indispensable for both men and women. However, Vedic tradition requires that schools for boys and girls should be separate. 
3086 :Keen to learn, the Brahmachari ranges freely over both earth and heaven. In him, the devas, i.e., organs of the body, senses, mind and the spirit, with their elemental deities, become united, consonant and cooperative (not disunited, dissonant and conflictive, their purpose being holistic). He holds the secular and sacred knowledge of earth and heaven in trust, and with austere discipline and dedication gives his teacher the joy of fulfilment. 
3087 :(For harmony of the individual human personality and the devas, mind and senses, refer to Atharva-veda 10, 2, 31 and Aitareyopanishad, 1, 2, 1-5.) Pitaras, parental protectors of life and society, divinely disposed people, divinities of nature and brilliant people, all in their own way, minister to the needs of the Brahmachari. Gandharvas, those that sustain life on earth, those that sustain the continuity of knowledge and the sacred Word, all divinities, thirty three, three hundred, six thousand, all favour him, and he gives them all the pleasure of fulfilment with his studies and his austere discipline of life. 
3088 :The teacher, Acharya, keeps the Brahmachari being admitted to the school close to him for three days and nights like a mother bearing the child in the womb, and when the Brahmachari emerges from that close observation, noble and brilliant people of the community come together to meet him. 
3089 :The earth and earthly knowledge is the Brahmachari’s first samit, fuel stick offered in the study yajna. The heaven and divine knowledge is the second samit, and thus with the samits he studies in full the third region of the middle space. Thus the Brahmachari, with the samit inputs into the yajna, with his determination symbolised by his girdle, his hard work and austere discipline covers all the three fields of his study with a sense of fulfilment all round. 
3090 :The Brahmachari, earlier bom of the parents, now clad in the flames of fire and brilliance of knowledge, emerges reborn from the divine studies of earth, heaven and the middle regions. From him now issues forth divine knowledge of Veda and Supreme Brahma, all his divine potentials with immortality of his spirit shining together, all noble people one with his knowledge and divine potentials. 
3091 :The Brahmachari goes forward, brilliant and inspired by the fuel fire of his knowledge, bearing an impressive and attractive mien, dedicated, consecrated and a socially committed graduate, a young man with beard and moustache. From the former stage of challenging Brahmacharya, he goes to the vast latter stage of social responsibilities, gathering assemblies of people, winning loud applause, proclaiming the value of knowledge and its applications for a progressive community. 
3092 :Having been an inmate in the house of immortal learning and grown to be a great scholar with the title of Indra, the Brahmachari now, contributing to sacred and secular knowledge of life, doing social work with noble action in the service of Prajapati, self-refulgent lord supreme and ruling powers of the nation, goes about dispelling the negative forces which damage life and the environment. 
3093 :The teacher prepares and presents fine models of heaven and earth with the solar system, both vast and deep with their atmosphere, both ethereal and vapours. The Brahmachari preserves, protects and serves them both with relentless discipline of his secular and sacred knowledge and commitment, so that, consequently, all the divine forces of earth and heaven become harmonious part of his knowledge and practical pursuit in action. 
3094 :This vast earth and this vast heaven and the knowledge of both and his place therein, the Brahmachari in his first phase of life receives and holds as a rightful gift for the child and disciple from the teacher and society. And having turned this double gift as fuel sticks for his yajnic living, he stands by them with commitment throughout life. In these two, heaven and earth, knowing them and living for them, are subsumed all facts and values of the entire world of existence. To these, all his knowledge, actions and prayers are dedicated. 
3095 :This one right here on earth is one wealth and value, that other beyond the top of heaven is another wealth and value. Both of these lie deep treasured in the heart core of the Brahmana, Brahmachari dedicated to knowledge and enlightened living. These two wealths and values, the Brahmachari, with his relentless discipline of knowledge and living, preserves, protects and promotes. And that is the all, and only that, which the scholar of Vedic knowledge of Brahma pursues as his sole aim in life. 
3096 :Right here on earth is one Agni, the fire energy. Beyond this earthly Agni, there is another, solar energy of light. These two meet and move together between heaven and earth in the middle region. Of these two and between these two, are strong rays of energy, the currents of Vayu energy. The Brahmachari masters this knowledge of comprehensive energy and the interaction of its variations through the discipline of his study and life. 
3097 :Roaring, thundering, the white, grey, dark and windy cloud, mighty powerful, bearing vapours of water for good of the earth rains down showers of vitality on mountains and the earth, by which all quarters of four directions and living beings on earth receive their life energy. (The cloud is a Brahmachari, i.e., working according to the laws of Brahma operative in nature. The cloud and rain is the result of the interaction of earthly and solar energy in the middle regions of the sky through electric currents. The Brahmachari too is the product of the interaction of the parents and the teacher and ,with his self-confidence and power of knowledge, works generously for the good of life on earth.) The Brahmachari offers samits, fuel sticks, with scientific knowledge, into the fire, sun, moon, winds and currents of water and vapour. The heat, light and energy currents, in their own ways, move to and operate in the cloud, and the result of their interaction is vapours, rain, waters, ghrta and living seed, and purusha, forms of life. 
3098 :(This mantra points to a yajnic science of rain. For the evolution of life refer to Taittiriyopanishad, 2,1). 
3099 :The Acharya is Mrtyu, Yama, who leads the Brahmachari from the natural phase of the first birth to the second, enlightened phase of life. The Acharya is Varuna, saves him from evil and negativity. The Acharya is Soma, harbinger of peace and inspiration. The Acharya is medicinal herbs and milk and water, i.e., harbinger of health, saviour from disease, and giver of food for energy. His living virtues are the clouds whence all peace and happiness is received from the showers. 
3100 :The close association of teacher and disciple creates only the light and grace of ghrta through education and enlightenment. The Acharya becomes Varuna, planner, giver and saviour, and freely gives what he chooses to give for the disciple’s contribution to society for its discipline and progress. And that very gift of the Acharya’s, the Brahmachari as a friend, returns to his people from his very soul. 
3101 :The Acharya ought to be a Brahmachari, dedicated to Brahma and divine discipline of austerity. Prajapati, ruler, protector and sustainer of the people, too, ought to be a Brahmachari. Then only the ruler shines and rules. The brilliant alone rises to be Indra, really powerful, and it is the powerful alone can rule. 
3102 :Only by Brahmacharya and austere self discipline does the ruler preserve, protect and promote the social order. Only by Brahmacharya does the Acharya wish to have Brahmachari for his disciple. 
3103 :Only by Brahmacharya does the virgin maiden find a youth as husband. Even the bull and the horse can eat and digest grass by natural Brahmacharya. 
3104 :Only by Brahmacharya and austere self discipline do the Devas, noble people, overcome untimely death. Indra, mighty ruler and refulgent teacher, brings joy and enlightenment for noble seekers only by the austere discipline of Brahmacharya. 
3105 :Herbs, the past time, future time, day and night, the trees, the year with the seasons, they all are observers of the unrelenting discipline and law of Brahmacharya, right things, only at the right time, in nature. 
3106 :All animals, of the earth, forest and the village, who are without wings, or birds of the sky, all of them observe the discipline of Brahmacharya, natural development of the body system and related behaviour. 
3107 :All forms of life created by Prajapati, individually and separately, bear pranic energy in themselves specifically. Brahma, natural discipline of divinity, inherited through the process of nature, protects and sustains them all in character. 
3108 :This discipline of Brahmacharya, distilled from nature and impelled from within by divine personages, unopposed and unviolated, brilliant and illuminative, pervades and rules the world of nature and humanity. Of that is born the divine knowledge and discipline of Supreme Brahma and from that arise all the noble and brilliant sages blest with the spirit of immortality against death. 
3109 :The Brahmachari bears the illuminative presence and knowldge of Brahma in which are summed up all the divinities of existence. He goes around manifesting prana, apana, vyana, Word and voice, mind, heart, Vedic knowledge and intelligence. 
3110 :O Brahmacharya, bring us the eye, ear, honour, food, seed vitality, vibrant blood and the noble appetite for living. 
3111 :In the midst of this sea of life on top of the waves of karma and consequence, passing through the crucibles of the discipline of continence and austerity, established in divinity, the Brahmachari develops all the virtues of physical, mental and social excellence and, graduated, committed, vibrantly healthy and golden gracious in generosity, he shines bright in life on earth. 
3112 :creepers, Indra, i.e., nature’s electric energy, Brhaspati, all sustaining air energy and the sun, and pray to the Lord of nature, they may protect us from sin, sickness and disease. 
3113 :(Natural forces correctly used give us health; abused, they cause suffering. We address them to understand their efficacy so that we take advantage of them and avoid abusing them. If we are correct, nature helps us, if we abuse or exploit nature, it reacts and we suffer. Therefore we pray: May God give us wisdom to take advantage of nature to be free from sin and suffering.) We address Varuna, the refulgent sun that forms the cloud, Mitra, the sun that forms delicious waters for us, Vishnu, the all reaching illuminative sun, Bhaga, the sun that brings morning energy, Ansha, pranic energy of the sun that inspires greenery, and Vivasvan, dispeller of darkenss, and we pray to God that we may be free from sin, suffering and disease. 
3114 :We address Savita, the rising sun, Dhata, the all-sustaining Vayu and gravitational force, Pusha, life promoting energy of nature, Tvashta, formative intelligence immanent in nature of the first order and we pray they may keep us free from sin, suffering and disease. 
3115 :We address wind and water, Ashvins, complementarities of natural currents of energy, Brahmanaspati, the specialist of Vedic knowledge, refulgent guiding forces of natural law, Aryama by name and attribute, and we pray they may save us from sin, suffering and distress. 
3116 :We address the day and night, both sun and moon and all the phases of the sun in the Zodiacs and pray that we may be free from sin and distress. 
3117 :And we address the wind, the cloud, the firmament, the quarters of space and the interspaces, all together, and we pray that we may be free from sin and suffering. 
3118 :May the day and night and the dawn free me from the ill effects of evil wishes and intentions of maligners. May the generous Soma whom they call the moon free me from the evil consequences of execrations. 
3119 :May the animals of the earth and beasts of the forest and powerful birds of the sky, we address, keep us free from sin and suffering. 
3120 :We address Bhava and Sharva, catalytic forces of nature’s evolution through making, breaking and remaking process, Rudra, spirit of natural justice, and Pashupati, lord of all living beings, and pray that all the arrows they shoot as we well know may always be kind and constructive for us. 
3121 :We address the regions of light, constellations of the stars, earth, holy places, mountains and clouds, seas, rivers and lakes, and pray they may be good to us and save us from sin and suffering. 
3122 :We address the seven Rshis, sagely powers of the social order corresponding to our senses and mind, noble people and their noble acts, noble women, the ruler protector and sustainer of the people, parental seniors who guide us on the path of law and discipline, and now address this prayer that they may save us from sin, suffering and distress. 
3123 :Those heavenly powers which abide in the regions of light, those that abide in the middle region, and those powers and forces which abide on earth for law and order may, we pray, protect us from sin and suffering. 
3124 :Adityas, Rudras and Vasus that provide light, justice and peaceful settlement, Brahmacharis of the Aditya, Rudra and Vasu order, unshaking powers of light in the heavenly region, Angirasas, pranic energies and inspiring leaders, intellectuals and pioneering thinkers all, we pray, may save us from sin and suffering. 
3125 :We address yajna, yajamana, scholars of Rks, Samans and the sanative Atharva, holy men of Yajurveda and their yajnic acts, and pray that they may save us from sin and suffering. 
3126 :We address five most efficacious ruling aspects of herbs chief of which is soma, their root, stalk, leaves, flowers and fruits, and we address darbha grass, bhanga stimulator, barley, and their power, and pray they may protect us from sin, suffering and disease. 
3127 :We address the ungenerous, the wicked, the snakes, the holy people, parental seniors, and the hundred ways people suffer and die, and we pray they spare and save us from sin and suffering. 
3128 :We address the seasons, sun, planets, winds and other atmospheric conditions which affect the seasons, seasonal conditions which affect life, exits and returns of the years, years, year cycles and months, and we pray we may be free from sin, suffering and disease. 
3129 :of humanity, come from the south, come from the west, come from north and from the east, rise and come forward to us, come together all divinities of nature and humanity, save us from sin, disease and distress. 
3130 :We address this to all divinities of nature and humanity of the world committed to truth, all devotees and promoters of divine knowledge and laws of life, to come with all their saving and promotive powers and protect us from sin and suffering of distress. 
3131 :We address this to all divinities of nature and humanity without exception, all committed to Truth, all devotees and promoters of divine knowledge and laws of life, to come with all their saving and promotive powers in entirety, and protect us from sin, disease and distress. 
3132 :We address the lord of existence, ruler, protector and sustainer of all living beings, and the controller of all elements of creation that is, and pray that they and all the forms of existence, together, may protect us from sin and suffering. 
3133 :Whatever divine forces of nature’s elements there are working in the vast quarters of space, whatever divine and refulgent dynamic processes are operative in the flow of twelve months of the seasons’ cycle, and whatever catalytic forces of Bhava and Sharva there be of time in the cycle of years, we pray, they may be good and auspicious to us. 
3134 :That immortal sanative, i.e., immortal knowledge, for the achievement of ultimate freedom of Moksha, which Matali, cosmic intelligence that drives the cosmic chariot, inherently bears as received from the light of omniscience immanent in the chariot, that very immortal sanative of knowledge and enlightenment may Indra let flow into the stream of human karma. That very immortal sanative, O Apah, Vishvedevas, divinities of nature and humanity, pray give us (so that we may be free from sin and suffering.) Note: Satavalekara has given a list of the deities of the earth, middle region and the region of light which comes to 93. In addition he gives a list of 172 including hundred forms of death (mantra 16). In all, the number of deities given by him come to two hundred and sixty- five for which the prayer to Divinity is that they may all be good and auspicious to humanity so that life may be free from sin and distress. 
3135 :Names and forms of things in existence subsist in the Ultimate Brahma which remains when all else is withdrawn to Zero. The world subsists withdrawn therein, and when it is in the created state of existence, it exists therein. Indra, energy, power and glory, Agni, fire, light and knowledge, the entire universe, exists sustained therein, and is withdrawn into that. That, the Ultimate Brahma, remains. That is Ucchhishta, the last that remains and the first that stirs (when the end is over and the beginning begins). 
3136 :Earth and heaven abide in Ultimate Brahma. The entire world of existence, of thought, energy and matter, abides and moves therein. The waters, the sea, the moon, the wind, all abide and move in Brahma and are withdrawn into That. 
3137 :Being and Non-Being both, death, food, energy and speed of motion, Prajapati, the sustaining power of created forms, all subsist in Brahma. All things of this world, lovables and rejectables, the beauty and grace that is in you and me, all is collected and concentrated in Brahma, That remains after all. 
3138 :The strong and firm, the firm and established, the mover and the moved as thinker and the thought, the creations of Prakrti and the food for creation, and ten subtle and gross elements, ten pranas that contribute to the created world, all are wholly held and sustained in Brahma as the wheel is held and sustained in the nave. Indeed, all divine forces of existence are held and sustained in Brahma, the Ultimate over and after all. 
3139 :The Rk, the Sama, the Yaju, the vaulting song of Aum, divine eulogy presented by the celebrant, the hinkara, the notes and accents of Samans, and the ecstasy that is in you and me, all is in Brahma. 
3140 :The hymns in adoration of Indra and Agni, the ecstatic praise of Soma, hymns in praise of the Supreme Divine, the grand adoration with five songs of Sama, all parts of yajna, all these abide and nestle in Brahma like the baby in the mother’s womb. 
3141 :Rajasuya, Vajapeya, Agnishtoma, the yajna of love and non-violence, Arka, the songs in adoration of Agni and Surya, Ashvamedha, the yajna in adoration of the social order, Jivabarhi, the yajna in adoration of life, and the most ecstatic songs and yajnic performances abide and subsist in Brahma that breathes without breath (Rgveda, 10, 129, 2) even when the fires are out and the music is silent. 
3142 :The kindling of fire in yajna, initiation with Diksha, the yajna for the fulfilment of specific projects with the hymns of Veda, yajnas for advancement in life, yajna sessions lasting for various periods of time, all abide and subsist in Brahma which remains when all else is gone, sucked in, withdrawn. 
3143 :Agnihotra, fire yajna as daily ritual, Shraddha, faith in ultimate truth, the offer of oblations with Vashatkara, Vratas, specific vows, Tapa, observance of austerity, Dakshina, gifts to the priest and the guru, Ishta, projects for specific aims, Purta, yajna for thanksgiving, all these abide and subsist in Brahma, the Ultimate One night yajna, two night yajna, the same day Soma yajna, the previous day Soma yajna, Ukthya yajna, other parts of yajna with subtle knowledge abide and subsist deep in Brahma like the warp and woof of existence. 
3144 :Four night session of yajna, five night session, six night session with double duration also of eight, ten and twelve night sessions, sixteen and seven night sessions, all are born of Supreme Brahma, and all of them abide and subsist in the eternal Brahma that ever remains beyond everything else. All the yajnic affairs that there are are born of It and into It they retire, held in the Immortal. 
3145 :Pratihara, responsive good and fourth part of a Sama song, Nidhana, wealth and the close of a Sama song, Vishvajit and Abhijit yajnas for success, the day long yajna and the yajna that lasts till the night, and the twelve day session, all abide and subsist in the transcendent Brahma. I pray all that virtue and yajnic potential were in me too. 
3146 :Truth and honesty of word and deed, reverence and humility, peace and protection, essential virtue and food for all, energy, immortality and the eternal joy of life, all these proceed from Brahma and return unto this Ultimate Divinity, and all the desires, plans and projects of humanity are fulfilled only by Its will and ultimate pleasure. 
3147 :Nine-region earths of space, oceans of earths and space, all orders of the regions of light, abide and are sustained in the Ultimate Brahma. The sun shines in Brahma. The day and night abide in Brahma. I pray the same be in me, the same also is in me. I am the Upahavya Somayaga, Vishuvat Somayaga, and all those yajnas hidden in mystery, all these the Burden Bearer of the universe bears and sustains, the Ultimate Brahma that is father of the father creator, i.e., the Absolute Brahma in transcendence over the Immanent. 
3148 :Father of father, the Ultimate Brahma is the Grand-father. It is the grandson of Prana, that is, the third stage of spiritual experience after Pranayama, after Pratyahara and Samyama. Ultimate ruler of the universe, It abides everywhere in the world of existence, omnificent and inviolable. 
3149 :Everything abides in the Ultimate Brahma: Rtam, the universal law, Satyam, the world of Prakrtic reality, Satyam and Rtam comprising the constant and the mutable and the law, Tapas, the relentless austerity of the law and discipline of life, Rashtra, the order of the individual, social and universal life, Shrama, hard work, Dharma, duty according to the Law, Karma, human action and the consequential chain of life in action, the past, present and future, valour and heroism, wealth and excellence, and strength within strength like circle within circle. 
3150 :Prosperity, lustre and splendour, thought and resolution, governance and the Dominion, six quarters of the world in space, the year and year-cycle, Ida, the ultimate Word, inspiration and advancement, all transactions and everything involved in life’s transactions, all is comprehended in the Ultimate Brahma. 
3151 :Chatur-hotr mantras recited at new moon and full moon yajna, Apri mantras, four yajnas performed in four months, hymns of praise and celebration, yajnas, priests, all rules and disciplines of living beings, in fact all acts and rituals people wish to perform for specific purposes, all these abide in Brahma. 
3152 :Half-months specially of the lunar year, months, seasonal activities along with the seasons, rippling, murmuring, roaring waters, thunder and lightning, and the grand voice of the Veda, all abide in the Ultimate Brahma. 
3153 :Gravel, sand, stone, herbs, creepers, grasses, clouds, lightning, rain, all abide at peace nestled in the Ultimate Brahma. 
3154 :Success and prosperity, achievement, attainment, universality, greatness, progress, abundance, prosperity, all abide, withdrawn, resolved, sustained in Ultimate Brahma. 
3155 :All that breathes with prana, all that sees with the eye, the Devas which abide in heaven sustained therein, all these are born of the Ultimate Brahma. 
3156 :All descriptions in the form of celebration and the Rgveda, songs of ecstasy and Samaveda, happy songs and Atharva-veda, all pre-historic literature along with Yajurveda, and all the divinities abiding and sustained in the region of light are born of the Ultimate Brahma. 
3157 :Prana and apana, eye, ear, the undiminishing mind and diminishing body, and all the divinities abiding and sustained in the light of heaven are born of the Ultimate Brahma. 
3158 :All ecstasy, pleasures, delights, happy celebrations and all the divinities abiding and sustained in the light of heaven are bom of Ultimate Brahma. 
3159 :All the divinities of nature and humanity, Pitaras, parental sustainers of humanity, the ordinary people, sustainers of earth and the divine Word and culture, all fluent forces in flux, and all the divine virtues abiding and sustained in the light of heaven are born of the Ultimate, all comprehensive Brahma, first and last everlasting of all else that is. 
3160 :When Manyu, Supreme Divinity’s thoughful love of creativity, bore, that is, objectified and manifested, Prakrti, Its consort, from the house of Sankalpa, Its will and resolution to create, then who were the co-mates of Prakrti? And who were the friends of Manyu, divine ardour of cosmic creativity? And who was the chief of the occasion, the bridegroom? In that mighty deep darkness of the ocean of uncreation, Tapa and Karma were the co-mates of Prakrti, and they were also the friends of thoughtful love and Cosmic Creativity, and the chief of the occasion was Brahma itself. 
3161 :Note: These two mantras are a metaphor of divine creation. Refer to Chhandogyopanishad, 6, 2, 1- 3 and Brhadaranyakopanishad, 1,4, 17. 
3162 :In the state of zero, absolute silence, before creation “Atman alone was there, only One (with Its essential Svadha: Rgveda, 10, 129, 2). It desired: I am One. I shall be many. I will create. It yearned for a mate (Prakrti). I shall generate. Let there be my power and potential incarnate, I shall act and create. This was the desire, Divine Resolution.” This action of creation and generation is the divine Karma. 
3163 :If we refer to Rgveda, 10, 190, 1, we find that Rtam, dynamics and Law of mutability, and Satyam, the constancy of Prakrti, were generated by the Tapas of the One sole existent Brahma which is the ever and ultimate presence awake eternally. Thus Karma and Tapas were the two co-mates of Brahma by Its own will. And these two were also the co-mates of simultaneous generation for Prakrti since these became immanent in Prakrti by divine will. This immanence and Prakrtic creation is studied in Sankhya Sutras in detail. 
3164 :In the beginning, from the divine powers of Prakrti, Rtam and Satyam, ten divine mutations of existentially activated Prakrti called Mahat were evolved. One who would know and directly describe them today would say something really great. 
3165 :(These ten could be described as ten elements, i.e., five subtle elements and five gross elements, or they could be described as ten pranas, or ten senses of perception and volition.) Prana and apana, eye, ear, constancy and mutability, vyana and udana, speech and mind, these carry the immanent thought and resolution of divinity in human activity. 
3166 :When seasons, Dhata the sustaining space, Brhaspati, Vayu, Indragni, electric and fire energy, and Ashvins, sun and moon, were not yet generated then which highest power did they stay by? They stayed by Kam, the lord of peace and bliss, the Jyeshtha Brahma. 
3167 :Tapa and Karma were there in the mighty deep ocean of silence present with Jyeshtha Brahma. Tapa was born of Karma. They, Dhata and others, abided with Karma, the will of Jyeshtha Brahma to be generated in the due course of Prakrtic evolution. 
3168 :(For Mahad-arnava refer to Rgveda, 10, 190, 1: Rtam and Satyam were generated from Tapa enkindled by the will and thought of Jyeshtha Brahma, then was generated Ratri, Night and Darkness, and then was generated Samudro’ arnava, the mighty ocean.) That which was the primeval earth, before this concrete mother earth sustaining her children came into being, and which only the visionaries of Truth know, is mysterious. Whoever knows that primeval earth by name, form and character is the man who really knows her as one of the earliest mysteries. 
3169 :Whence did Indra arise, whence soma, whence agni did arise? Whence did tvashta come into being? Whence did dhata arise? Indra arose from Indra, soma from Soma, agni arose from Agni, twashta was born of Tvashta, and dhata was born of Dhata. 
3170 :Those ten divinities, that were born of ten cosmic Divinities at the beginning of creative evolution, gave the world of life, i.e., the human body, to their children. Having given that, in which world do they abide? When they bore hair, bone, sinews, flesh marrow, and made the body complete unto the feet, then, having done that and given the body to man, to which world did they retire and return? Who and whence bore and brought hair, whence sinews, whence bones? Who bore and brought parts of the body, the joints, the marrow? Who bore and brought the flesh and whence? Samsico nama te deva ye sambharantsamabharan. Sarvam samsicya martyam devdh purusamavisan. 
3171 :Together, life-infusing are those divinities, harbingers of living showers, which bring the body and spirit of life and, having given all for life and living to the mortal, they enter man. 
3172 :Who is the visionary sage who joined together thighs, knees and legs and feet, head, hands and mouth? Who fixed together the back and ribs, the collar bone and the sides? Who is that? The great creative-structurist power of Jyeshtha Brahma put together and joined head, hands, mouth, the tongue, neck and the neck and collar bones, and having bound and covered all with the skin made up the body for the living spirit. 
3173 :Into this great body which lay joined together, bound and covered by the divine formative power, who filled the colour with which it shines so beautiful? All the divinities joined together (as they wanted to take it for residence) and wanted it perfected. They would offer assistance too. That, Prakrti, being Jyeshtha Brahma’s consort, controlling power of the Great controller, perceived and realised. She filled the colours (For the divinities wanting a home and their choice of the human body see Aitareya Upanishad, 1, 2, 1-5.) When Tvashta the higher, father of Tvashta, nature’s formative faculty, opened entrances into the human body, then the divinities, taking the mortal body for residence, entered the human body, the Purusha. 
3174 :Dream and sleep, exhaustion and fatigue, want and adversity, sinfulness, negativities of various names and descriptions, age and infirmity, baldness, grey hair, all these followed and entered the body. 
3175 :behaviour, Truth, Yajna, honour and excellence, and broad-mindedness, honourable sense of valour, protection and social order, lustre and glory, all these followed together and entered the body. 
3176 :Prosperity, want and poverty, generosity, ungenerosity and wretchedness, hunger and thirst of various kinds, followed together and entered the body. 
3177 :Censure and reproahes, praise and adorations, things surely positive, and the negatives and rejections, thanks-giving, faith, doubt and faithlessness, all these entered the human body. 
3178 :Knowledge and ignorance of various kinds, all else that is worth teaching and learning, Brahma, divine discipline and awareness, Rgveda, Samans and Yajurveda and Brahma-Atharva-veda, all entered the human body. 
3179 :Higher ecstasies, pleasures, delights and celebrations laughter, dance and social revelry, all entered the human body. 
3180 :Conversations and communications, complaints and lamentations, declarations and determinations, deceptions and detractions, distractions and ambiguities, plans, performances of things on hand and cooperations entered the human body. 
3181 :Prana and apana, inhalation and exhalation of breath, eye, ear, psychic and physical faculties, vyana and udana, all circulating and elevating energy of prana, speech, mind, all these move and act with the body. 
3182 :Blessings and benedictions, rules and injunctions, orders and directions, distinctions and specialisations, all that there are, thoughts and memories, intentions and vows of discipline followed and entered the human body. 
3183 :In the body which is both pleasant and unpleasant, the divinities have placed liquid flows pertaining to waters and blood in the veins and arteries and in the excretory regions, the flow that is fast and slow, secret, pure and thick (because of impurity). 
3184 :Having made the bones as fuel wood for fire, the divinities placed eight orders of water in the body, and having made the vital fluid as ghrta for the fire, they entered Purusha for self-fulfilment through the human yajna of creative existence. 
3185 :All waters, divine powers of sense and mind, Virat, i.e., Prakrti, consort with Brahma, and Brahma and food entered the body, and over all, body, senses and mind, was Prajapati, jiva, the individual soul. 
3186 :The sun takes its share of the eye, the wind takes its share of the breath, of man. The rest of man’s person the divinities give over to Agni, the fire. 
3187 :For this reason, therefore, the man of knowledge regards this person as Brahma almost, because all divinities abide in it as cows live in the stall. 
3188 :By the first and inevitable law of death, the Jiva, human soul that goes all ways all round, normally goes three ways: By one kind of Karma it goes to that species which is better than human, by another it goes to subhuman species, and by yet another it lives life here itself in the human species. (Refer to Yogasutras, 4, 7-8) In the midst of the dynamic flow of life’s waters evolving within the fixed laws of Rtam, the human body is placed. In the midst of that body the human soul is placed over all else. For the reason that it rules over the body, mind and senses, it is called the master, the powerful, the free (though within the laws of Rtam and human karma). 
3189 :All fighting forces, arrows, bows, valorous marksmen and their exploits, swords, axes and deadly missiles, thoughts and plans in the mind, all these, O commander of the forces, mobilise, and display the thunderbolt explosives so that the enemies may see and feel demoralised. 
3190 :Rise, take up arms, all you friends and forces of the noble order. O Commander, O friends of ours, let some of you be seen in prominence, and let others, in reserve, be unseen. 
3191 :O Arbudi, O Nyarbudi, officer in command and supreme commander, rise and take on the enemy forces, hold them up and force them to surrender, Take them into captivity. 
3192 :Brilliant Arbudi, noble Commander, and the Commander-in-Chief, Nyarbudi who rules the forces, by whom the sky is covered with the air-force and this earth is covered with the ground forces, with these friends of Indra, the ruler, I enter the conquered territory with the army. 
3193 :Noble and brilliant Commander, Arbudi, rise with the army routing the force of the enemies and bind them into captivity as a snake binds the victim with its coils surrounding it. 
3194 :O Nyarbudi, examine the seven newly developed explosive thunder arms, and when the ghrta has been offered into the fire, rise with them and march with the army. 
3195 :O Commander, when her man is rent and killed by your attack, the widow, beating her breast, her face covered with flowing tears, ears void of rings, her hair dishevelled, would wail over the death of her husband. 
3196 :O Commander, after they were rent and killed by your attack, the widows, drawing together and wringing their hands together, would wish at heart that their sons, husbands, brothers and others of their people were alive. 
3197 :O Commander, after the enemy were rent and destroyed by your attack, voracious carnivores, vultures, falcons, ravens, crows, kites and other birds would hover and feast and rejoice on your enemies, showing well what you have done. 
3198 :O Commander, wild beasts with buzzing flies and creeping worms, would gorge upon the dead bodies of men rent and fallen under your attack. 
3199 :O Commander, O Supreme Commander, hold and freeze the breath of the enemies, root out their morale under the force of your attack, and let wailing cries of loss and woe go round in their ranks as you watch the confusion. 
3200 :O Supreme Commander, shake the enemies, dislodge them from their position, strike them with terror, paralyse their movement, freeze their arms with overwhelming force, and fix them under the force of your attack. 
3201 :O Supreme Commander, let their arms be paralysed, let their mind and morale at heart be stupefied, spare none and nothing of them, O Commander, under the force of your attack. 
3202 :O Commander, let the widows of the enemies, their hair dishevalled, unanointed, run around together, weeping and wailing, beating their breast and thighs, when their men are rent and killed under the force of your attack. 
3203 :O Commander, prepare sensitive detective forces of smart and dynamic informants of various forms and hues collecting highly secret, violent and damaging information in secret code and rendering it in to the ruler, all these to reveal and expose the enemies. Show your explosive power and still express your best intentions for peace and good will. 
3204 :Display the airforce, proud and bold, which shatters the proud and arrogant, armaments that are explosive, those that are yet unexposed, rulers of the earth on your side, forces on the move, Sarpas, other forces, and the Rakshas, absolute destroyers, and yet show your noble and generous intentions. 
3205 :Display the four-pronged, steel tipped, deadly weapons, and virile, irresistible, fearsome warriors of veteran high standing. 
3206 :O Commander, shake up with terror those allied forces of the enemies. O Nyarbudi, Supreme Commander, eager for victory and victorious, friends and allies of Indra, the ruler, defeat and rout the enemy forces. 
3207 :Fallen, crushed, dead, let the enemy lie and sleep, O Nyarbudi, Supreme Commander, and let the flames of fire and columns of smoke with the army, victorious, move forward. 
3208 :O Commander, with that army, let Indra, all powerful ruler, pick up one by one and eliminate the prominent leaders and members of the enemies now thrust back. Let none of them be spared. 
3209 :Let their hearts break up and their breath go up and out. Let the mouths of the unfriendly be dry and parched, but not so of the friends. 
3210 :O Commander, let those that are patient and wise and those that are impatient and unwise, those that withdraw and those who were deaf and would not listen to anyone, those who are stupefied with darkness and those that are dressed in goat-skin: Let all those, O Arbudi, fall in so that the enemy may see them. And show them your own generosity too. 
3211 :Let the Commander and Trishandhi, tripartite peace commission, settle and fix these enemies of ours so that, O Indra, destroyer of darkness, ruler and lord of all power of action, we may eliminate the enemies by the hundreds and uproot enmity from humanity. 
3212 :O Arbudi, herbs and trees, products of herbs and trees, medicinal plants and creepers, keepers and guardians of earth and the environment, powers of the skies and flowing waters, Sarpas, surreptitious ones, devas, people of divine nature, noble people of charitable mind, parental powers of the nation, all these, O Commander, you show for the former enemies. Show your explosive powers too and extend your generosity and reasonableness too. 
3213 :O Commander, Arbudi, enemies and enmity having been eliminated under your command, and O people of the land and earth, let Maruts, winds and powers vibrant as the winds, rule over you. Let self refulgent sun, Aditya, Brahmanaspati, lord of the universe and and master and promoter of Brahma, universal Word and voice, rule over you. Let Indra, lord omnipotent, and mighty ruler, Agni, universal light of life, fire of yajna, and enlightened leader, Dhata, universal law of sustenance and the powers of law and order, Mitra, world friendship and universal love, and Prajapati, Lord Divine and father of his children of creation, and the protector, ruler and controller of the people and their children rule over you. Let the Rshis, visionary sages of truth and enlightenment rule over you, all with love, justice, light and power of truth and law for peace, prosperity and happiness. 
3214 :O friends and generous enlightened leaders, rulers and guardians of all these people of the land and the world, rise you all, be ready in harness, bond with these people together, and, having won this battle of war, peace and friendship against enmity, take up your office of duty in accordance with your assignment and order, and there abide, steadfast all. 
3215 :O warriors of high order of chivalry, rise together in top gear with your banners, and O Sarpas, Rakshasas, and others, pursue the enemies and fall upon them. 
3216 :saha. Ye antarikse ye divi prthivyam ye ca mana- vah. Trisandhe ste cetasi durnamhna upas at dm. 
3217 :I know your rule and order, O Trishandhi, along with your scarlet banners. Whatever forces there are in the middle region, in the region of light, and on the earth, whatever people, and whatever evil and notorious elements there be, O Trishandhi, let all these be in your mind and on record. 
3218 :Let arrows, steel tipped, needle sharp, multipointed penetrative, hitting at the speed of storm and eating into the flesh, engage the enemies when fired by three-stage rocket of the order of a thunderbolt. 
3219 :O Jataveda, expert of the science of fire, brilliant commander, let the many corpses of the enemies be interred, and let this army of Trishandhi, well ordered and organised, be within my cotrol. 
3220 :Arise you, brilliant and noble Commander, Arbudi, with your force. This tribute of appreciation, recognition and reward offered to you is Trishhandhi’s cherished contribution to you in consequence of your success. 
3221 :Let this four stage white and black mounted rocket to fire the missiles destroy the targets. O destroyer, alongwith the forces of Trisandhi, be monitored for the destruction of the enemies. 
3222 :Let the eye blinding smoke screen be fired and fall, let the deafening missile be fired and fall, and Trishandhi’s army being victorious, let the crimson flags be raised as a mark of victory. 
3223 :Let the birds that fly in the sky and higher air towards the regions of light come back here. Let carnivores and flies devour the corpses. Let carrion eating vultures feast upon the carcasses. 
3224 :O Brhaspati, lord of the universe and universal Word, the harmonious Dharmic synthesis which you have established with and between Indra and Brahma, that is, power, and vision of wisdom and knowledge, with that practical union and compromise in real life, I, Indra, the ruler, call upon all the devas, brilliant people and say : Win here and not any other-where. 
3225 :Brhaspati, ruler of the wide world, Angirasas, practitioners of Vedic science and technology, Rshis, visionary sages, all inspired by Brahma, Vedic vision, in the light of divinity, have taken sheltered recourse to the triple Dharmic unity of knowledge, action and prayer for the limitation and elimination of evil and demonic elements of life for the sake of victory here in life itself. 
3226 :Aditya, refulgent sun held in position, and Indra, cosmic energy, both are sustained, that very triple union and triple compromise in practical life, the devas, brilliant and victorious people, have lived and served with dedication for achieving the strength and splendour of life. 
3227 :All lokas, immortal lights, beauties and ecstasies of existence, devas, brilliant sagely people, have won with this offer of service and self-sacrifice in the state of triple harmony, the same unfailing thunderbolt of Dharmic action, destroyer of demonic evil, which Brhaspati and Angirasas lived and served with dedication. 
3228 :That thunderbolt of triple harmony of Dharmic knowledge, action and prayer in dedication, destroyer of demonic evil, which Brhaspati and Angirasas wielded, served and promoted, the same triple armour, O Brhaspati, I wear, with the same thunderbolt I rout the force of unrighteousness, and with the same strength and splendour I destroy the enemies of life. 
3229 :All the divines come here to the triple centre- hold of life and victory and receive the fruits of yajnic service performed with Vedic formula of Vashat. O Devas, enjoy this offer and win your self-fulfilment here, not there on the other side of loss and negativity. 
3230 :May all the devas, brilliant sagely seekers of life and victory, come to this triple centrehold of yajnic performance. Contribution to this yajna of personal and social fulfilment is dear to Trishandhi, lord of positivity, negativity and the higher complementarity of the two in life’s evolution. May they protect, preserve, and promote this great balance and harmony by which purely negative and destructive forces were defeated and the Devas won over the demons since the beginning of time. 
3231 :Let Vayu bend and break the tips of enemy arrows, let Indra break their arms one by one, so that they may not even fix the arrow on the bow, let Aditya destroy their missiles, and let Chandrama block the path of the enemy before their advance, yet keep it open to facilitate the two-way communications to follow as possible and desirable for peace. 
3232 :(This mantra reveals the tactics of war as well as of peace. Vayu is the preventive power that forestalls the enemy advance, Indra is the power to break down the enemy before the strike, Aditya is the brilliant blazing power that intercepts and destroys the enemy’s latest missiles, and Chandrama is the power that defends as well as promotes peace.) If they reach our holy peaceful cities, use our own knowledge, food or holy people or holy things for defence and offence, thus protecting their persons and enacting their all-round defence, turn all that effort to naught. 
3233 :O Trishandhi, supreme commander of triple power of defence, offence and peace, pursuing the enemy with deadly force, facing their forces in front with death itself, march on forward with your army, conquer the unfriendly powers, and go on advancing. 
3234 :O Trishandhi, you cover the enemies with smoke and darkness and, starved of food and water, devoid of their very life breath, forced back by fire and power, let none of them be spared. 
3235 :O Commander, let your force, moving forward in light as well as in darkness on wheels of steel, fall upon the enemy’s supporting forces, let the enemy forces then be bewildered and stupefied. 
3236 :O Nyarbudi, Chief Commander, bewildered and stupefied as the enemy forces are, destroy them all, the chief ones all, destroy them with this force. 
3237 :Whoever the enemy with corslet or without corslet, whoever on the move on chariot, all must fall in battle, hit by bow and arrow, by the warrior on chariot, or by a soldier in corslet. 
3238 :Whoever the enemy in armour or without armour, or those who hold and provide the armour, let them fall and lie on the ground, O Commander, and the dogs would devour them when they are dead. 
3239 :Those on chariot, those not on chariot, those on horse, those not on horse, vultures, hawks and other birds must devour them all as they lie dead. 
3240 :Let the force of a thousand mutilated and dead in the battle of deadly arms, lie asleep, bound in the snares of death. 
3241 :Birds of prey would feed upon the force of violence hit in the vitals, wailing, at heart afflicted, crushed, asleep in death, the force that wanted to fight this self-sacrificing army of ours ready to face the enemy. 
3242 :Divinities of nature and humanity stand by that self-sacrificing army, and there can be no failure of that army (which stands for the defence of peace). May Indra, the Ruler destroyer of evil and darkness, eliminate the enemies of humanity by that army, the triple thunderbolt of justice, punishment and love of peace, and the triple alliance of peace, freedom and cooperation. 
3243 :Pillars of the Earth: Truth of Constancy, Infinity, Law of Mutability, Passion for Truth and Law, inviolable Commitment, Austerity of discipline, Divine knowledge, Yajna, participative living for creativity and contribution: these sustain the Earth, the life on earth and the human family on earth. May She, Prthivi, Mother, sustainer of past, present and future of all living beings, provide and continue to provide a beautiful wide world of life and joy for all of us. 
3244 :Among whose intelligent people there is freedom from bondage and perfect equanimity and balance between high and low, who bears many herbs and trees of varied vigour and vitality, may that Earth provide ample room for expansion and growth and possibilities of higher success and progress. 
3245 :Where seas roll and rivers flow, lakes abound and showers fall incessantly, where food is plenty and people live in comfort, where a moving, breathing, vibrant world of life exists in wide variety, may that Mother Earth establish us in abundant peace and prosperity. 
3246 :The earth mother whose four quarters extend far and wide in space, where food is plenty and farmers and other people grow happy, which bears and sustains her living breathing children vibrant and happy in a variety of ways, may that motherland establish us in plenty of the wealth of cows and food. 
3247 :Where our ancient forefathers did wonderful deeds, where brilliant heroes kept the negative, violent and demonic forces down under control, where there are protective and promotive shelter stalls for cows, horses and birds, may that motherland bless us with honour and excellence, lustre and splendour. 
3248 :Bearer and sustainer of the world, treasure-hold of wealth, shelter and stability of life, golden in form and beauty, shelter home of world community, bearing and sustaining citizens of the world, may mother earth ruled by generous omnipotent Indra give us the light of life and leadership and establish us the in wealth in life. 
3249 :Generous and brilliant brave sleeplessly protect and serve the firm and wide motherland without relent and wantonness. May she, generous giver of wealth and excellence of the world for all, give us honey sweets of life and consecrate us with light and splendour. 
3250 :That earth which in the beginning of creation nestled in the liquid mutation of Prakrti in the vast spatial ocean of particles (Rgveda 10, 190, 1), over which wise sages roamed around free with their wondrous vision and supernal creations, whose heart core wrapped in truth abides in the supreme light of Divinity, that mother earth may, we pray, establish light and splendour, and strength and power in our social order, the noblest of its kind in the universe. 
3251 :On which free flowing rivers flow continuously day and night without relent, may that earth of abundant streams and rivers bless us with refreshing waters and Earth Mother which Ashvins, day and night, have wrapped in light and shade, which Vishnu, the sun, covers in a single step, which Indra, Lord Supreme, renders free from enemy powers, may that mother land release milk and water in plenty for me, her child. 
3252 :Earth Mother, may your hills and mountains capped with snow, and your woodlands be good and grand and pleasant, and, on this land, brown and productive, dark green and fertile, red and luxuriant, vast and varied in form and hue, firm and unshakable seat of settlement guarded by mighty heroes of Indra, may we live safe and secure with pride and confidence, unconquered free, unbroken and unviolated. 
3253 :Earth Mother, whatever is in the midst of your person, whatever is at the centre of your person, and your gift for us from the clouds and the sky, and all that is the nutriments and energy from your body, pray establish us therein, make us pure and strong. 
3254 :The earth is my mother, I am a child of the Earth Mother’s. The sky and the rain cloud from the sun and sky is my father. I am a child of Nature. May the father and mother give us total fulfilment. 
3255 :Whereon, on the ground, the disciples of Vishvakarma build the vedi, sit round and perform and extend and direct the yajna of social development, whereon, before the oblations are offered, celebrative posts and pillars, pure, white and powerful, are designed and raised, may that earth, herself rising and developing, O Mother Earth, whoever hate and malign us, whoever fight against us and enslave us by mind, whoever by physical force of deadly kind, O motherland, ever active and preventive of evil, subdue him, subject him to correction or destroy him. 
3256 :Born of you, living and moving around freely on you, all the mortals, humans, animals, birds, you bear, support and sustain. Mother Earth, yours are all the children, all five classes, native as well as foreign; for all of these mortals, the immortal light, the sun, rising and radiating with its rays, shines far and wide. 
3257 :Let all these people, your children, together receive the mother’s gift of nourishment, sustenance and support. O Mother Earth, bless me with honey sweets of the Common Word and mutual discourse, pray establish me therein. 
3258 :O children of the earth, let us all together and always serve and live in accord with the universal love, unity and generosity of Mother Earth, vast and wide, mother of all herbs and trees, firm, established in Dharma, blissfully peaceful, beautiful and gracious beyond bounds. 
3259 :Mother Earth, be, indeed you are, the mighty one great hall of residence for humanity. High is your velocity, mighty your motion, terrible your tremor. Mighty Indra, the sun, keeps and protects you in orbit relentlessly, the Ruler maintains you at peace vigilantly. O motherland, let us shine in the golden glory of light and grandeur on earth. Let none hate and malign us. Let us live with love in mutual trust. 
3260 :There is agni, fire energy in the earth, fire in the herbs and trees, waters bear fire, there is fire in stones, fire in humans, in cows, and in horses, fire of various orders and energy, electric, magnetic, pure light. 
3261 :Agni burns, shines and radiates from the solar region as the sun. By divine Agni, wind blows and lightning flashes as electrical energy. Humans light the fire which loves to consume ghrta and carries the oblations from earth to heaven. 
3262 :The Earth, wrapped in fire, unbound with limitations, may, I pray, vest me in light and fire and turn me sharp and refined. 
3263 :On earth, people offer homage of the finest and best prepared havi in yajna to the divinities, and they offer service and hospitality to revered sages and scholars. On earth, mortal men live their life on food with their own essential nature, character and energy for survival and growth. May that Mother Earth, giver of food and energy, bring us pranic energy, good health and full long age to live a life of piety and fulfilment. 
3264 :Earth Mother, that sweet fragrance which is your very essence, which herbs and trees, and seas and streams bear, which Gandharvas and Apsaras, all those that live and play on earth and those that float and frolick and swim in waters share, with that same fragrance make me fragrant. Let none of us hate any one, let no one hate us. 
3265 :Mother Earth, that fragrance of yours which has entered the lotus flower, which, since time immemorial, the immortals bear and bring in radiation of the solar rays and their contact with the earth, with that fragrance make me fragrant. Let none of us hate any one, let no one hate us. 
3266 :That fragrance of yours which breathes in men, in women, in males and females, which is in grandeur and excellence, beauty and glamour, which is in horses and brave heroes, which is in beasts of the forest and in elephants, which is in the beauty of innocence and lustre of virginity among maidens, with that fragrance, O Mother Earth, make us fragrant. Let none of us hate any one, let no one hate us. 
3267 :The slab and stone, dust and mountain, all is earth. That earth is placed in position, firmly in place in orbit. To that Earth Mother and to her golden expanse like the mother’s bosom, I do homage of obeisance. 
3268 :Whereon herbs and trees of the forest stand firm and always flourish, that Mother Earth, bearer and sustainer of all things of the world, placed and held very well in her position, we praise and serve with reverence. 
3269 :Sitting or standing, moving around or walking forward on both legs right and left, let us never fall, never waver, nor fail ever. 
3270 :To Earth, sacred mother, pure, unhurt, forbearing, growing by divine power and celebrated with Vedic songs of adoration, bearing food, energy, and every body’s share of nourishment and ghrta, I say: O motherland, let us all sit with you together at peace. 
3271 :Mother Earth, let pure showers and streams of water flow for our body’s health. Whatever negative, bad or evil be ours, we assign to our dislike and rejection. O Motherland, I initiate and consecrate myself with the purity and sanctity of your presence, inspiration and holy action. 
3272 :May your regions in front or at the back, up or down, O Mother Earth, all directions and sub-directions, where I live and move, be good and auspicious to me. As long as I live with your support in the world, let me never stumble and never fall down. 
3273 :O Mother Earth, do not push us from behind, from front, from above and from below. Pray be kind and gracious. Let there be no thieves, robbers and highway men among us. Throw off all weapons of destruction far away from us. 
3274 :O Motherland, as long as I live, look to you and watch around with the gracious light of the sun, that long let my eye and discriminative judgement never fail over time passing on with the passage of years. 
3275 :O Motherland, while I sleep and change sides right and left, and when we lie face upward and back on the ground, then O Motherland, gracious giver of O Mother Earth, when I dig and till the soil to sow the seed, let the seed grow soon and the ground fill up. O gracious, purifying and regenerative Mother, never would I hurt your vitality and fertility, never will I rip up your heart. 
3276 :O Motherland, expansive Mother Earth, may your seasons, summers, rains, autumns, winters, freezing winters and springs in the yearly cycle and the days and nights be generous and give profuse showers of nature’s gifts to us. 
3277 :Mother Earth which goes on revolving and rotating at high speed, which is worth discovering and researching, in which there are fire energies which are in waters too, which goes on in time, throwing off negative destroyers of positivities, which loves to be with Indra, the powerful sun, not with the covering darkness and evil: such is the earth which sustains and is held in position for the mighty generous giver of showers. (The earth is for the generous brave.) Whereon halls of residence and stores of havi are built for congregations of yajna-performers, where pillars are designed and raised for the yajna sessions, where sagely scholars of Yajurveda worship the Lord of Universe with Rks and Samans, where high priests engage in yajna and distil the soma for oblations to Indra, Lord Omnipotent: such is our Mother Earth. 
3278 :Whereon creative sages of ancient times, seven sages, with yajnic sessions of their life time with yajna and austerity of Tapas, chanted the holy songs of Veda: such is our motherland. 
3279 :That ancient Motherland may give us whatever wealth, honour and excellence we pray for, may Indra, Lord of glory, pioneer of great creative power, be with us, and then may the honour and grandeur of the world follow for us in the footsteps of Indra. 
3280 :The Motherland on whose bosom mortal people of various classes and cultures sing and dance in joy, whereon war drums boom and warriors clash with shouts and chllenges against the adversaries, may that Motherland throw away violent adversaries, and render me free from enemies and war. 
3281 :Whereon abound food grains, rice and barley, whereon five classes of people, native and foreign, happily live together, to this Mother Earth blest by showers, beloved of the cloud, honour and salutations ! Whose cities are created, designed and built by divine architects, in whose fields various productive projects are pursued and perfected, may Prajapati, lord of the people, render that Earth Mother of the world in every place in every direction happy and joyous for us. 
3282 :Bearing wealth of many forms deep in the mines, I pray, may the Mother Earth give me wealth, jewels and gold. Generous Mother divine, noble at heart, giver of wealth, may bear and continue to give us wealth of all kinds. 
3283 :Bearing and sustaining many people speaking different languages and observing different forms of Dharma and Karma in life, conduct and profession in many different ways like a family living in the same one home, may the wide and varied earth mother, constant, firm and undisturbed, give me a thousand showers and streams of wealth like the mother cow profusely giving streams of milk steadily, continuously and patiently. 
3284 :(This mantra may be interpreted as the prayer of a ruler as well as of a citizen of the country which, in this sukta, should be interpreted as the world.) Whether it is a snake or a scorpion whose bite causes excessive thirst, or an insect or germ which causes fever with shivering cold or delirium, all of which could be hidden and might come out, live and roam around in rains, may all these, O Mother Earth, never come close to me. Pray bless us with that which is good. 
3285 :Many are the paths and highways for carts and chariots meant for public transport, by which both good people and bad elements of society travel. Pray let us control them and make them free from enemies, thieves, robbers and smugglers. O Mother Earth, bless us with that which is good. 
3286 :Bearing her own gravitation, attraction and forbearance, sustaining both the virtuous and the sinful and shaping their family and family line, the earth in cooperation with the cloud, moves on in orbit doing homage to the sun, sojourner of space. 
3287 :Your animals of the forest, the deer inhabiting the woods, lions and tigers, carnivorous they are, all ranging over you, O Mother Earth, remove away all those ferocious wolves, she bears, and all deadly devils dangerous to people. 
3288 :Mother Earth, pray throw out and keep away from us all those demons and violent forces which are negative, destructive, selfish, exploitative, and blood thirsty. 
3289 :On which bipeds, birds, swans, eagles, hawks and others fly and land (on lakes and trees), where winds and storms blow raising dust, shaking trees and beating the clouds, where light and shade alternate in response to the strength and calm of the winds, that is Mother Earth. 
3290 :Mother Earth where day and night, bright and dark, are joined in the natural system, the vast earth which is soaked and covered with showers of rain, may she, we pray, establish us in goodness, peace and prosperity with noble good fortune in every place and situation. 
3291 :May the heaven, this vast earth, this expansive firmament, heat and light, sun, waters, and all divinities of nature and humanity of the world bless me with holy intelligence and good will. 
3292 :I am the man, a patient, forbearing challenger, forward fighter, for sure, the winner on the field. I beat who faces me, I win all over the land, I am the conqueror all round in all directions (overall the problems and all the crises that face me, threaten to defeat me, and deprive me of my identity). 
3293 :O divine Mother Earth, when in those early ancient times you expanded and, exalted by divine forces of nature and humanity, you waxed with grandeur, then the prosperity and excellence of life and motherhood entered your personality and you rose to the energy, power, inspiration and glory of your divine identity all over the four directions. Be that, O Mother, and continue to be that all time, everywhere. 
3294 :O Mother, whatever villages and cities there are, or forests, or parliaments and assemblies there are on earth, whatever battles or problems, whatever committees, congregations and conferences there be, we shall speak and perform well everywhere and do you proud. 
3295 :Happy, calm, and moving forward at a pleasant, undisturbing pace, protector of her earthly world, bearer and sustainer of herbs and trees, ever since she was born, the Earth Mother, like a horse that shakes off dust from its body, shakes off those people who live but presume to possess and over-ride her as masters. 
3296 :Whatever I speak, that is sweet as honey, whatever or whoever I see and meet, they love and honour me. Brilliant and dynamic with a drive, I throw out all those others who are angry with me and hostile toward the motherland. 
3297 :Peaceable, kind and beneficent, fragrant, gentle and blissful, overflowing with milk, food and water, may the expansive Earth Mother, with all her wealth of nourishments, speak to me and inspire me in the motherland. 
3298 :When Vishvakarma, maker of the universe, wished to evolve and form the earth which was then contained in the spatial ocean of waters, and, further, when he wished to vest it with all the materials favourable to the emergence and support of life in the course of natural evolution, then all the nutriments of food and drink implicit in the mysterious cave of Mother Nature meant for all forms of life were born of Mother Earth, grew up and came into existence. 
3299 :(For the natural evolution of life from Divine Will and the existential mutation of Nature refer to Taittiriya Upanishad 2, 1.) Earth Mother, you are Aditi, unbreakable and indivisible, giver of fulfilment, growing and expansive in living potential. You provide the field of production, growth and development for humanity. And whatever is wanted of you for such growth, Prajapati, first selfmanifest Divinity and father creator and sustainer of life forms, in the course of creative evolution and the Law of Mutability, replenishes and fulfils. 
3300 :Earth Mother, let the wombs and bosoms of fertility, creativity and motherly care, bom, reborn and developed, be free from negativity and cancerous diseases. Let our life be long, full and healthy, and let us all, your children, awakened and enlightened, be homage bearers with reverence and gratitude to you. 
3301 :Earth Mother, creative, dynamic and one with me, sustain and support me with light and all that is good. Keep me established firmly in wealth, honour and excellence, blest in prosperity and grace. 
3302 :O fire, rise on the reeds. Your place is not here. This lead is your food. Come and rise. Whatever cancer or consumption there is among cows and other animals or humans, along with that go down from here, far off from us. 
3303 :(This mantra is addressed to the fire, the fuel being reeds. On reed fire, which is slow and mild, lead is melted and burnt with certain chemicals and ash, i.e., Bhasma, is prepared for medicinal purposes for the cure of cancer and consumption. The mantra is not a magic formula, but it suggests a miraculous cure with lead- ash for diseases which eat up the flesh and blood and bone of the patient.) Whatever cancer or consumption is caused by sinful acts or despicable habits, by doing certain acts or imitating and following certain negative acts and habits, all that cancer and consumption, even fatal diseases and untimely death, we ward off with that lead-ash and cast out. 
3304 :We drive out from here death and disease, adversity and negativity. O Agni, saviour of the patient’s person, destroy that disease and germs which eat into our flesh and eliminate those negative forces which we hate to suffer. All these we send up to you for cure. 
3305 :If the flesh-eating fire, that is, cancerous disease that consumes the patient’s flesh enters the house or stall like carnivorous beasts on the prowl, I deal with it with Masha paste and ghrta,specially of goat or sheep, and send it far out where it might join other forms of fire such as electric energy in the waters. 
3306 :If on the patient’s death, people stricken with rage and sorrow put out the fire, that absence ought to be corrected and fire restored in the home. Therefore we light the fire again in the home. 
3307 :O Garhapatyagni, sacred home fire, let the enlightened people of Aditya, Rudra and Vasu order of discipline and scholarship, the Brahma of knowledge, wisdom and practical vision, and the sagely scholar of Vedic lore, rekindle and establish you in the family for inmates of the home for their long and healthy life of a hundred years. 
3308 :If life-consuming Agni of average activity were to enter this home, yours though,then watching this other, Jatavedas Agni of higher and divine purpose, I take that away for the service of parents, grand parents and other forefathers. Let it light and add to the heat and light of the highest region and carry our yajna there. 
3309 :Kravyada Agni, which carries on the dynamics of flesh on the natural plane, I assign to far off forces other than the spirit. Let it be the carrier of the acts of evil to the house of Yama, death and sufferance. For me, this other fire, Jataveda, brilliant leader of enlightened life, knowing the rules and paths of the good life, may carry our offerings in yajna to the divinities and to the ultimate Lord Supreme. 
3310 :(To understand the difference between the service of Kravyadagni and that of Jataveda, refer to Gita, 3, 13 and 17, 4-6, and Kathopanishad, 1,1,23-26.) Enlightened and inspired, with adamantine discipline of Dharmic living, I subdue the Kravyadagni which is death and fixes people as if with a stroke of lightning. Knowing well the mortality of corporeal existence in contrast with the spirit’s immortality, I control the onslaughts of natural and carnal passion by dedication to Garhapatyagni, sacred fire of higher yajna, even though I acknowledge the natural place of Kravyadagni of biological dynamics in the field of the continuity of the species. 
3311 :I acknowledge the existence and place of Kravyadagni, the fire of natural passion for biological continuity of life along the paths of procreation and successive generation as it is celebrated in history and literature as such. But I subdue it for higher spiritual ends by the paths of life divine and pray : Pray come not again, stay where you are in the biological line, and keep awake in parental couples for a life time. 
3312 :People light the fire, all cotrolling, catalytic, and separating the body from the soul, freeing the pure from the impure, for the sake of the good of life. They become cleansed, pure, and purifiers of the self. The spirit gives up the smear of the material body and passes beyond existential involvements. Thus does the lighted fire, pure and purifier, purify the spirit. 
3313 :Divine fire, catalytic agent of nature and divinity, abides on top of the heavens of light. Thence radiated, immaculate and free, it releases us from all imprecation and sin. 
3314 :Into this Agni, all controlling catalytic, purifying fire, we pour and purify our material smears, become pure performers of yajna and associates of divinity throughout life. May the holy fire advance and elevate our life to fullness, free from sin and sickness. 
3315 :Destroyer of common ailments, destroyer of individual ailments, eliminator of sin and sickness wholly, and a silent agent of nature and divinity is the divine fire. O man, may all modes, mutations and manners of this fire, acting together to a united end, destroy even from the farthest your cancerous consumptions of body and mind for spiritual purification. 
3316 :Whatever cancerous ailment there may be in our horses and in brave youth and warriors, whatever in our cows, sheep and goats, we throw out that flesh eating consumptive fire energy of evil and negativity which vexes humanity. 
3317 :O Kravyadagni, flesh eating cancerous consumptive fire of negativity and disease, who vex the life of all living forms on earth, we throw you out of all other people, cows and horses anywhere else in the world. 
3318 :Hey Agni, O man pure as fire, having merged in and purified yourself through yajnic discipline, you too rise to the light of heaven with oblations of ghrta into that sacred fire into which divinities merged and purified themselves, and into which humanity merged and purified itself in body, mind and soul. 
3319 :O sacred fire of Ahavaniyagni, kindled, raised and served with oblations of ghrta, pray do not neglect us, do not bypass us, nor assail us as Kravyadagni. Shine for us here itself in this very heaven on earth so that we may see the sun, light of heaven, right now for all time in our journey of life. 
3320 :Whatever headache of existential smear or cancerous consumption is there, wash it off in lead-ash, wash it off in the reed fire, wash it off in the purifying fire, wash it off in the purity of nature and in the pure warmth of the sun. 
3321 :Having absorbed the dirt and impurity of the headache of cancerous consumption into the lead ash, into the pure warmth of the sun, into the milk of black sheep or goat, having thus eliminated the impurity, be pure and immaculate performers of life’s yajna. 
3322 :O Death, go far away at the farthest, by the path that is other than this path of divinity, I say to you who have eyes to see and ears to hear. Let there be a plenty of the brave here free from danger and death. 
3323 :All these that are living have come from the shades of death in life. Our dedication, service and prayer to Divinity has been auspcious and fruitful today. Let us go forward to live a life of high order of virtue to sing and dance with joyous laughter and, blest with progeny worthy of the brave, define a social order of knowledge, justice and Dharma. 
3324 :I set this border line of order and discipline for these living people. Let none of them trespass this border line into the other territory of death. Let them so live a long age of full hundred years, bearing though the fact of death within with adamantine walls of resistance by Come, take on to life enthusiastically, and go forward rising to the heights of life at the full, striving in order one after another till you reach the destination, as many as you are. And may Tvashta, lord maker of life, loving and friendly, lead you to fulfilment as you choose to live your life at the full. 
3325 :As day-nights follow one after the other, as seasons move on in cycle one in link with the other, so may the successor among you follow and not forsake the predecessor, and thus may the Lord Ordainer and sustainer of life order and guide the life of all these people on earth. 
3326 :The rocky stream of life flows on in flood. Hold on fast together, friends, rise and swim to the shore. Let us jettison all that is inauspicious here. Let us swim and cross over to attain the trophies of victory. Drop the miseries, attain to the state of joy. 
3327 :Arise friends, heave the boat together and cross to the shore. This rocky stream now rises in storm. Here itself throw off all those things which are no good, and let us cross over to win the good, the beautiful, and the grand prizes of victory in truth. 
3328 :Join and start serving the winsome divinity of universal good, that way being purified, sanctified immaculate saviours of the self for the real beauty and splendour of life. Crossing over all evil and temptations, let us together, all unassailable brave, enjoy life for a full hundred years of happiness. 
3329 :By the best and highest vibrant ways of yoga practice, having rejected the lower ways of living, thinking and doing, the Rshis of high order conquer the pain of death by thrice seven ways of piety and noble actions at every step of life. 
3330 :Effacing the pain of death, bearing a full long age unto completion and fulfilment, come hither and, sitting on the seat of yoga in the house of holiness, calm and undisturbed, warding off the onslaught of death, let us all, living happily, celebrate the life and beauties of the social order. 
3331 :to their husbands, should anoint themselves with cream and collyrium, and let them, free from tears and sorrow, free from ill-health, wearing jewels and ornaments, go forward in life as proud mothers in their home. 
3332 :I serve them both, men and women, with the sacred food they need, and I strengthen both with the Vedic knowledge they deserve. And I provide the Pitaras, parental seniors, with the food and energy which maintains their own vitality and resistance to early aging and disease, and I provide others with food and maintenance for good health and longevity of life. 
3333 :(This mantra can be interpreted as a divine word, or a social promise of the ruling power, or a promise of the house-holder.) O Pitaras, seniors of humanity and parents of every human individual, that love, fire and passion for humanity and divinity-the immortal vested in mortals -which is rooted in our hearts since eternity, that same human attribute I preciously hold at heart and pray it may never forsake us, and we too may never forsake it, nor ever deny any one. 
3334 :Having taken some fire from the household fire and turned, go south with this flesh-eating fire to the cremation ground and do what is good for the departed pitaras and what is good and dear to the self and the learned people. 
3335 :(This mantra describes the function of Kravyada, flesh eating, fire in case of death or sickness. If there is a death in the family, the funeral fire is Kravyada. If a person is suffering from cancer, the cancer is Kravyada. And, also, the drug that fights and destroys the cancer is Kravyada. Whether it is funeral fire, or cancer or the drug, all these three are nature’s energy, and energy is fire and fire is energy. The function defines its character.) Kravyadagni, unless it is propitiated, exhausted and extinguished by elimination of the cause, continues to consume and deplete the wealth of the eldest son upto the double of his share of wealth, savings and earnings both, and thus reduces him to utter poverty. 
3336 :All that mortal man produces by farming, whatever he receives by salary, and whatever he earns by trade, is not his really, unless he eliminates the Kravyadagni and its cause from the house. 
3337 :Whoever the mortal man whom cancerous Kravyadagni pursues, he is unable to perform any yajna, he loses the lustre of life, even food is not for him to eat. In fact, he is deprived of all, his farm, his cows, his entire wealth in the end, unless he dispels the carnivorous cause from his life and home. 
3338 :knowing them and afflicting them at the closest, the victim, having been reduced to ruin, has to go to cutthroat money-sharks and plead for a loan again and again in order to survive. 
3339 :The homes and all the inmates are seized with sorrow when the husband of a woman dies. At that time a learned scholar of the Veda should be sought and found who may dispel the ravages of sorrow and despair caused by Kravyadagi. 
3340 :Whatever the sin, evil or trespass that we have committed, which has smeared our peace and purity, may the soothing streams of waters and the tranquillity of divine meditation cleanse us of that and save us from the mind-splitting flames of Kravyadagni. 
3341 :Those streams of the waters of life flow from the earth below and rise on high to heaven, and they flow back from heaven on high to life on earth below, and knowing thus all the paths of existence they circulate in the cycle of birth, death and rebirth. From top of the generous cloud on high they shower on top of the mountain and, formed anew into streams and rivers, they flow on, streams of life, old but ancient and eternal, ever new. 
3342 :(Thus are the ravages of Kravyadagni washed out into life anew.) O Akravyadagni, fire of renewal (which by healing counters the fire that eats into the vitals of life), dispel the Kravyadagni and bring in the Deva-yajani fire which would continue the yajna of life and living anew. 
3343 :(This mantra also suggests the efficacy of medication and healing by fumes and aroma.) The infection of Kravyadagni has entered and affected this patient. This patient, in consequence, has suffered the cancerous ravages of the disease. Diagnosing these two separately, the infection with the cause and the consequent suffering process, and taking them both as dangerously, damaging, I dispel both, the disease as well as the root cause. 
3344 :Garhapatyagni, yajnic fire of the home, cosmic home maintained by nature and the individual home maintained by humans, is vested within, in the creative and recuperative powers of nature, and in the heart-core of men of divine disposition. And this Agni, also, is the border line of conduct for humans (because while it works in nature as divinely programmed within the border lines determined, it works in humans by choice which is open to observance as well as to violation). 
3345 :O Garhapatyagni of home yajna, augment and elevate the life, health and age of the souls alive, and help the dead also to rise and reach the region of Phams’ noble life in future on earth. O noble fire, heating, straining and exhausting all want, adversity and disease from life, bless us with happiness, prosperity and excellence more and ever more day by day. 
3346 :Holy fire, challenging and subduing all the adversarial forces of life on earth, pray recover and return to us the wealth and energy of life being wasted on those negativities of human existence and pollution. 
3347 :Take on to the love, protection and support of this Indra, divine power and potential. It takes you across all cancerous onslaughts of negativity, adversity and misfortune, makes up your loss and deficiency, and gives you total fulfilment. It saves and releases you from despicable evils and suffering. With that power, ward off the deadly darts of impending calamities and protect yourself from the punitive shots of Rudra, nature’s punishments for the violations of its law and discipline. (These are gifts of divine Garhapatyagni.) the universal burden bearer, the ark of divinity. It will take you across the storms of life’s despicable evils. Come, embark this boat of Savita, Lord Creator, inspirer and saviour with the light of life. Let us swim over the flood of darkness and self-ignorance and attain to the splendour of life by sixfold lights of the six quarters of space and the divine message of the six-dimensional universe of heaven and earth, day and night, water and vegetation of our cosmic and earthly environment. 
3348 :Day and night you move on, bearing the burden of the universe, yet still and constant, giver of peace and saviour over the floods and storms of existence, holiest potent sustenance and support of the brave, mainstay of the healthy and happy minds, you are the giver of the fragrance of life for humanity. Come, O Lord, and always bless us with health, happiness and the fragrance of life. 
3349 :live a continuous life of sin and deprivation whom cancerous Kravyadagni uproots at the closest, just as a wild horse tramples and wastes a slope of reeds by the lake. 
3350 :Those who are void of faith and truth and dedicated to lust for wealth of money align themselves with carnivorous fire, they always put the pan on the fire but the pan as well as the meat belongs of others, invariably. 
3351 :Mentally they wish to soar high but again and again they fall back to earth whom carnivorous Agni pursues relentlessly, knowing them at the closest by nature, character and ambition. 
3352 :O cancerous carnivorous fire, the milk of black sheep, of all the animals, is your favourite food. Also, they say, the ash of lead or silver and gold too is your share. Crushed masha lentils also is your food, in fact you better go and roam around in the thick of forest woods. 
3353 :Having made withered munja grass and the stock of reed as fuel of fire and having offered white sesamum for oblation, Indra, the physician, dispelled the flesh-eating fire of death from the body and the home. 
3354 :Having bowed to the refulgent sun yonder in front, having surrendered to the omnipresent self- refulgent Divinity, I have directed away the energies of all those negative powers which eat into the flesh, and I have joined these senses, mind and pranic energies of mine with nature’s positive powers of health, happiness and a long full age. 
3355 :Brave man, intelligent soul, mature and self- confident, come, take this seat of distinction here, invite whoever be your dearest choice of love, and as much as you first met, thought, associated and agreed together earlier, may that life pattern, love and harmony be equal and equally acceptable in the ethos, culture and values of the social order. 
3356 :(This mantra is relevant to love, marriage, home, family and also to the entire social order and its tradition. A life of love, harmony and social order is a very paradise on earth, and that paradisal bliss also is the food of life on top.) Thus as far well as you first met, thought, associated and agreed together without reservation, that far perfectly let your vision, that much your noble powers, that high your splendour, and to that very extent let your advancement and achievements be common together. And just as fire takes on the fuel and sets it ablaze, so let your love and passion for life inspire your conjugal body, matured, seasoned and united, and raise it to brilliance so that you become an ideal couple. 
3357 :United together in this home life of conjugality, on the path of divinities and in all affairs of the social order from home life upto the united world of humanity, go on together in unison. And purified, sanctified and consecrated by the holy rites of matrimony, bring up to full life what is born of your joint vigour and vitality and call it up to its natural performance and perfection. 
3358 :O children of nature and divinity, vigilant guards of the human community, nobly born and blest with vigour and vitality, come together, take this life fully in hand and enter the fluid field of action in the dynamics of existence. Plunge into it and take for yourself your shares what they call the nectar of action and its fruit, the immortal food of life which Mother Nature prepares for you to the last detail of perfection. 
3359 :Whatever food for life your father prepares and matures for you, whatever your mother prepares for you, whatever Mother Nature prepares, and whatever the Father Supreme perfects and releases from the Voice of Veda in order to release you from the stains and smears of earthly involvements and the colours and covers of existential fluctuations, that food of divinity and divine revelation in a thousand showers leads you both to the ecstasy of super joy and pervades both heaven and earth with its own splendour and majesty. 
3360 :Both heaven and earth, both those worlds of here and hereafter, all those states of joy which the performers of yajna have won by their noble actions, of all these, whatever is most enlightened and delicious as honey, there on top in Grhastha live at peace together with children till the completion and fulfilment of your life. 
3361 :O wedded couple, start off together, move foreward eastwards, the direction of a fresh sunrise, step by step. People of truth and faith live and honour this world of Grhastha. It is with your maturity of body, mind, culture and mission that you have entered this material life of yajna fire. Live in Grhastha and honour that mission for its protection and fulfilment till the completion. 
3362 :Moving on in life together to the right, turn round the holy ideal of Grhastha in the service of promotive nature and redeeming Divinity, and therein may Yama, lord of law and recompense bless you with abundant peace and fulfilment in a happy home. 
3363 :Moving on to this noble direction of the west, declining in years but rising in ripeness and wisdom, when the moon and peace, Soma, is the dominant ruler, protector and giver of tranquillity, stay together in loving company, seasoned in love and loyalty and enjoy a life of serenity and meditation. 
3364 :The rising nation rises higher by our progeny rising as the future promise. May the north above, the highest direction, raise us to the front forward in every direction of progress. At this stage man becomes happily free and self-fulfilled in his senses and mind with complete satisfaction. May we all feel complete and fulfilled in all aspects of worldly life. 
3365 :Steady is this Earth mother. Salutations to her. May she be kind and gracious for our children and for ourselves. This divine indivisible earth is universally abundant and generous for all. May you, divine mother, protect and maintain our maturity as the human nation just as Lord Supreme protects the universe. 
3366 :Lord Supreme, just as a father loves and meets his children, so pray love and be with us, your children. Let the winds blow auspicious for us here on earth. And may the service which noble divine couples mature and offer to you, and the food they cook for yajnic offering be inspired by truth and divine austerity, and may that service and food also define our truth and sincere austerity of discipline in piety here. 
3367 :stealthily alight on a dish or pan in the home, or when a maid with soiled hands smear the mortar and pestle, let the waters wash off the dirt and smear away and cleanse the dish and mortar and pestle. 
3368 :This grinding stone, this vital air and pranic energy, this learned man of life sciences, broad based, pure, purified with holy materials may destroy the lifedamaging elements. O learned man, pray have a seat, bring us great peace, purity and freedom. Let no couple suffer the want and deprivation of children and let no one have to face the pain of their suffering. 
3369 :This forest gift and this scholar of nature’s forest gifts has come to us with the divine energies of nature, protecting us against blood sucking and life threatening negativities of the environment. Rising high, he speaks to us words of health care and freedom from disease with which, we pray, we may win gifts of the earth, environment and all other regions of space. 
3370 :All living beings especially humans have received seven organs of perception, volition and discrimination, (these are eyes, ears, nose tongue and the skin, with mind (mana) and intelligence (Buddhi). All thirty-three divinities (eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, Indra and Prajapati) are associated with these and co-operate with these. That person who is the most enlightened and most boldly creative may, we wish and pray, lead us to the state of paradise on earth. 
3371 :O Lord giver of life and knowledge, you lead us to the state of paradisal bliss on earth. Bless us that we may live and enjoy life with wife and children. May the wife whose hand I hold always go with me here in Grhastha. Let no want, adversity and distress ever assail us. 
3372 :Dear partner, let us reject that freezing state of sloth and sin which seizes our will and action. Cast away gloom and depression, talk with love and enthusiasm. But the wooden pestle that is raised must not be violent, it must not break nor crush the rice which is for offering to the divinities. 
3373 :O man, universally broad-minded, brilliant as fire and refined as ghrta, being one with mankind, come, join and integrate with this world community. Take to discriminative intelligence, like a winnowing basket of a year’s full growth of reed which separates the grain from chaff, and separate the truth from falsehood and thus accept and advance truth and reject the untruth. 
3374 :Three are the regions discriminated by the Vedic sage as by Veda itself: they are heaven, earth and the middle regions. (So are three orders of the truth of reality: Sanatana, i.e., absolute constant truth of heavenly light, earthly truth conditioned by time and place, and the middling truth which is a historical mutation of the Sanatana). With your judgement, take on to the essences of truth like the freshest shoots of eternal soma, love, act and advance the truth, and let historical truth come to your discriminative judgement again and again for the continuous advancement of Sanatana truth and Dharma against the outmoded junk and falsehood. 
3375 :(Refer also to Atharva-veda 10, 8, 23 for the manifestation of the Sanatana, old yet ever new, like the succession of night-and-day, the same yet ever new and fresh.) Many ways different are the forms of living beings. In fact, one single-form Prakrti by her abundance and versatility becomes many formed. Similarly the soul, all alike in the essence, assumes many forms because of the variety of Prakrtic forms. The same soul of many Prakrtic forms becomes essentially the same one form by the success of meditation. O soul, jettison this form of flesh and blood and be the soul in the essence. The enlightened sage would cleanse you to purity of essence as the washerman washes away the colour and dirt of the cloth and renders it pure white in the essence. 
3376 :I render you back, Prthivi, material body, into Prthivi, Mother Nature, the same in essence though this one is a mutation of the essence, Prakrti. 
3377 :O man, whatever is shining, whatever the writing from existence in the material body, waste yourself not thereby and therefrom, I supplement that with knowledge of the Veda to let the seed state fructify to fresh maturity. 
3378 :I place you, Prthivi, the human soul in body form, together with Prthivi, the world of nature. Mother Nature, as a mother loves her child, so pray love your child. Just as the pan and the pot do not feel afflicted in the fire as they get baked and tempered, so you too, o man, do not get afflicted in the fiery vedi of life armed as you are with the fighting powers of yajna and tempered as you are with the flames of ghrta fire. 
3379 :In the Vedic crucibles of life, let the yajnic flames of life-fire protect and temper you from the front in the east. Let Indra, with his forces of Maruts, protect and strengthen you from the right in the south. Let Varuna protect, strengthen and secure you from the back in the west for adamantine strength in the all-supporting environment, and let Soma, peace, refreshment and renewal support and sustain you from the left in the north. 
3380 :Showers of holy water, energised and purified by rays of the sun purify us. Indeed they reach the heaven, the earth and all other regions of space. Those showers of waters, full of life, blissful and beatifying, constant and unfailing, held in the jar of life, may the fire of yajna energise and thereby inspire us to the state of fire, passion and light of the spirit. 
3381 :The waters of life come from the heaven of light and join the earth with living energy. From the earth they rise and reach to join the skies. Pure and sanctified as they are, they are bright and holy. May they lead us to the regions of bliss. 
3382 :The waters of life are abundant, constant and eternal, and they are also measured in forms such as jars, the human body as well, and they are bright, potent and sacred, they are pure immortal nectar. Such as you are, O waters of life, well directed, controlled and beneficent, pray prepare, mature, season and provide the food of life for the wedded couples with showers of grace. 
3383 :Measured are the drops of water which join the earth as with prana and apana energies they seep into and join the herbs and trees. But measureless are the showers, golden and pure, which all come to the earth as seeds of life, and that way they attain to the state of purity, sanctity and divinity. 
3384 :They rise in contest, they dance and rejoice, and heated by the sun they throw up foam and shoot off volleys of droplet bullets. Just as a youthful wife having seen her husband solicits him for romance of the season, so you too, O waters, join the youthful couples, and for those delicious delicacies they would love to enjoy. 
3385 :Raise the rice settled at the bottom of the pan so that the grains may mix with the water. You have measured the water in relation to the pot and the ladles as rice too has been measured in relation to the size and space of the pan. 
3386 :Take up the sickle, be quick, take the herbs shining at dawn, chipping without damaging the herb at the joint. Let the herbs, of which soma is supremely efficacious, be free from afflictive and outrageous aftereffects. 
3387 :Strew fresh sheets of grass for the rice feast. Let these be soothing to the heart and pleasing to the eye. On them let divine sages with divine ladies be seated and enjoy this feast of rice according to the seasons. 
3388 :O Vanaspati, host and master of this auspicious feast, be seated on this grassy sheet spread for you, along with the sages and the ladies and with the plans for Agnishtoma yajnas. And the beauty of this entire programme created as if by Tvashta, divine architect, is seen here in all details of the vedi and utensils for yajna finished with his art. 
3389 :For sixty years of life, the master of the house, carrying on the yajna and yajnic charity, should, with his experience and growth of mature wisdom, wish and work to enjoy the spiritual bliss of life, while the parents and children, depending on him, live and enjoy their life. O Lord, lead him to the ultimate bliss of life at the end of his yajna on top of knowledge and spiritual vision. 
3390 :O house-holder, be firm, divinely supported on the firm foundation of the earth. Stay unshaken, let the divinities inspire you to move on on the path of yajnic living. And when you have done your job, call it a day, let living, inspiring wedded couples with living jovial children help you be released and relieved of your duties to the divine fire of yajna. 
3391 :Having lived and fulfilled all your desires and ambitions as much and as far as they were, and thus having ruled and conquered all your earthly territories of existence, you have reached this phase of freedom and renunciation. Place all your spoons and ladles, all that was and were yours in life, in one basket, deliver that all to your trusted follower in the line, and raise your self as pure soul, free from all burdens. 
3392 :Spread out your mattress, move ahead, hold on this life of divinity and shine it with the light of spiritual vision. And O Devas, divinities of heaven and earth, just as the mother cow loves the young calf eager for a feed of milk, so welcome this new comer with a song and fulfill him with the milk of paradise. 
3393 :You have spread out your mattress and fully attained to this new phase of life. Let this incomparable phase which leads to heavenly bliss expand wide and high. Let the one mighty supama, elevated soul, rest and shine as the sun in this phase and may all divinities of heaven and earth extend their love and devotion for the joy of his mind and senses. 
3394 :O man, whatever your wife does separately from you, and O woman, whatever your husband does by himself away from you, do all that together with each other. Let all that be jointly yours, one in common, as you are leading your wedded life together in unison as one personality. 
3395 :All our children bom of her by me who live and serve the motherland, call them all together to dinner on one table, and let the children too know their one common link of natural piety, the centre to which they should come and join together. 
3396 :All those streams of wealth and joy on earth in Grhastha which are replete with honey and mixed with ghrta are centre-holds of nectar and immortality. Let the earthly paradise of the home hold in all these, and let the master protector and maintainer of the home wish and strive for these through sixty years. 
3397 :Let the head and guradian of the family wish and strive to protect, maintain and promote this homely commonwealth. Others who would not wish and strive thus would deny and deprive themselves all round of this divine familial bliss. This earthly paradise of homely bliss is given by us, divinities of earth and heaven, which man should try to attain through three stages of Brhmacharya education, Grhastha life of yajna, and the stage of retirement and renunciation across three generations of the wedded couple, parents and children for threefold bliss of body, mind and soul for the individual, the family and the society as a whole. 
3398 :May Agni, light of knowledge and fire of passion for life and positive living, light up, burn out and eliminate the negativities of life in humanity and the environment. Let darkness, ignorance and exploitation eating into the vitals of life and sucking the blood of innocents be out by the holy fire of yajna. Let us throw out all such antisocial elements. Let us shut them all out. Let brilliant scholars of Aditya order, and Angirasas, veterans of wisdom, adamantine will, determined action and vibrant spirit of life take these up and deal with them appropriately with justice. 
3399 :To the sages and scholars of Aditya order and vibrant leaders of determined action and policy for the elimination of negativities from society and the environment, I offer these honey sweets of homage with approval and total cooperation mixed with ghrta to sprinkle their holy fire of social yajna. O wedded couples, men and women of the human nation, your hands are clean, you do not violate the vision and will of the Brahmana, man of knowledge and foresight, your actions are positive, I exhort you to act, cooperate, create and enjoy this happy paradise on earth free from ogres and blood suckers. 
3400 :This highest state of this earthly paradise from which I attain to the light and vision of supreme divinity too, I have realised. O men and women of the world, wedded couples, prepare and anoint yourselves with the powers and graces of life and join the yajna of social salvation with best cooperation as you sprinkle the fires with purest ghrta. And know, you Angirasas, people of vision and will, that this is our share of Dharma and commitment here in the world toward life, society and We offer and contribute this, our cherished share of treasure, toward the peace, prosperity and enlightenment of the human nation for the protection and promotion of truth and right values, austerity and observance of discipline and law, and the enlightened nobilities of humanity and divinities of nature in the environment. Let it not be thrown out to gambling, nor spent out on war, nor wasted over others opposed to social values, nor must it be released before I approve (as for example national approval of the budget). 
3401 :I cook, I give, my wife is dedicated with me to acts of love and piety with sympathy and compassion. My bachelor son and virgin daughter is born and dedicated to society. Indeed the whole society is grown to be my own child. O men and women, O rising generation, begin your life enthusiastically, rise higher and higher. 
3402 :There is nothing short, no want, no void in the Lord’s system here in life, nor props nor false supports, no one can go on without one’s own identity on stilts provided by friends. The life before us is full and perfect, prepared and provided by our own selves by our own karma. The dish one has cooked presents itself before the one that has cooked it. One must taste the fruit of one’s own action (in the cycle). 
3403 :We must do the dearest of the dear for the dear we love, because all those that hate fall into darkness. The milch cow, the burden bearing bull, and the food that comes to us again and again, let these push off the death of the kind we loathe to face. 
3404 :All the fires of nature’s yajna are akin and join together in action, those that ripen herbs and trees and those that make the clouds to shower and rivers to flow. As long as divine lights shining in heavens of space mature the divinities of nature and humanity, so long the golden light of generosity will continue to inspire those that work with love and provide food for the needy. 
3405 :This cover, the human form of all others, the cloth, and the karmic extension of yajna is provided only in the case of the human being. All other living beings are neither naked (because they are given a natural cover) nor do they perform any yajna. O men and women, cover yourselves with cloth and yajnic service of the social system. And home made cloth and home yajna is the first requisite of divine service. 
3406 :Whatever untrue you utter in gambling disputes, or in selfish disputes, or with the desire to win undeserved money, seal it therein, exhaust it, better burn it in the yajna fire while you both wear the common vestments of yajna to wash off the pollution of your Pray for the shower of divine mercy and grace, go up to the divinities, shake off the dust and smoke from your body and mind. Being liberal and universally free, anointed with ghrta, rise to this higher region of the firmament and there join with the people of your nature and character in the spirit. 
3407 :The soul desirous of rising to the state of paradisal bliss, knowing itself as the soul, raises and transforms its existential body in many ways, from one colour and character to another and higher in quality. Conquering its dark character and purifying it, it rises to the bright and transparent, i.e., from flesh and blood of its gross body and from the blood and passion of its mind, it rises to the crystalline purity of intelligence. 
3408 :O man of noble ambition, I offer your nature and character of flesh and blood and passion into the fire of karmic and spiritual yajna and transform your being into pure and free soul. 
3409 :We deliver you unto the eastern direction, to its lord Agni, transparent and free protector, to Aditya, the sun, wielder of the arrows of light. May Agni, Aditya, protect this, our brother on his onward journey. 
3410 :May this lord guide us to our destined goal till the completion and fulfilment of our existence on earth and deliver us to death and judgement of divinity for our onward journey with the ripeness of our karma and maturity of our existential self. 
3411 :We deliver you unto the Southern quarter, to its lord Indra, ruler, protector and controller of the waves of energy, to Yama, wielder of the arrows of judgement. May Indra, Yama, protect this our brother on his onward journey. 
3412 :May this lord guide us to our destined goal till the completion and fulfilment of our existence on earth and deliver us to death and judgement of divinity for our onward journey with the ripeness of our karma and maturity of our existential self. 
3413 :We deliver you unto the Western quarter, to its lord Varuna, protector, destroyer of the violent, and sustainer of life, wielder of the arrows of energy and nourishment. May Varuna and divine energy protect this our brother on his onward journey. 
3414 :May this lord guide us to our destined goal till the completion and fulfilment of our existence on earth and deliver us to death and judgement of divinity for our onward journey with the ripeness of our karma and maturity of our existential self. 
3415 :We deliver you unto the Northern quarter, to Soma, lord self-existent protector, thunderous wielder of the vibrations of peace and exhilaration. May Soma protect this our brother on his onward journey. 
3416 :May this lord guide us to our destined goal till the completion and fulfilment of our existence on earth and deliver us to death and divine judgement for our onward journey with the ripeness of our karma and maturity of our existential self. 
3417 :We deliver you unto the lower quarter, to Vishnu, lord protector pervader of greenery, and to the penertrative efficacy of herbs. May Vishnu protect this our brother on his onward journey. 
3418 :May this lord guide us to our destined goal till the completion and fulfilment of our existence on earth and deliver us to death and divine judgement for our onward journey with the ripeness of our karma and maturity of our existential self. 
3419 :We deliver you unto the upper quarter, to Brhaspati, lord protector and master of growth and progress, wielder of the rain of showers. May he protect this our brother on his onward journey. 
3420 :May this lord guide us to our destined goal till the completion and fulfilment of our existence on earth and deliver us to death and divine judgement for our onward journey with the ripeness of our karma and maturity of our existential self. 
3421 :“I give”: this every one should say always, and one should think and act in consonance with the same mood of generosity. One who gives a gift of the cow, land, and Vedic speech to the seekers and devotees of holy speech is blest with children, grand children and good people all round. 
3422 :He barters himself away along with his cattle, wealth and even his progeny and people who fails to give the divine cow, Vedic speech, to the seekers and followers of the Rshis. He reduces himself to naught. 
3423 :Whether one is an individual or a ruler, if one’s speech, ethics and policy of action, specially in creativity and giving, is illusive, his people are destroyed thereby, if it is lame, he falls into the pit of adversity, if it is divisive, his homes are burnt, and if it is partial and short-sighted, his own identity is lost. 
3424 :The man of power gone red or pale with passion and frustration for loss of identity, regains from the treasure source of Divine Voice his identity as master of the Word, with his lands and dominion too. For this reasons the essence and identity is worth knowing and remembering, for this reason, O Vedic Voice, you are ‘Vasha’, the free, the powerful, the indomitable. 
3425 :The man who perspires for acquistion of the holy Voice discovers and fulfils his real identity from the twofold foundation of its real treasure, i.e., from secular and sacred knowledge of the Veda. But those are lost and split apart who, through indifference, taste or smell it merely from afar. They lose their identity. 
3426 :He who tries to bend its ears, i.e., twists the sense of the Voice, to suit himself, isolates himself from the wise and the learned. And he that believes that he has had a glimpse of it and there is no need for more reduces his identity to something too small. 
3427 :And whoever, for whatever selfish purpose, twists its meaning and cuts its extensive hair for his own trophy, for that very reason his coming generations die out and waiting wolves pounce upon his children. 
3428 :And while Gopati, the ruler, is there and the sagely scholar of the Vedic Voice is there, and yet some clever thief picks away a shred of its body, identity and meaning, the rising generation dies and cancer infects the commonwealth from remiss. 
3429 :And when negative and destructive forces grab the power and production of the land, desecrate its free voice and culture, thence arises the pollution and distortion of its form and character, and then recovery from sin and crime is hard. 
3430 :Nevertheless, Vasha, the Vedic Voice of Truth and free speech of the Brahmana committed to truth and eternal values, reasserting, arises, inspiring the brilliant, the generous, and the learned faithful for recovery, rebirth and reconstruction. For this reason this Voice is to be entrusted to the seekers of Brahma, the ultimate Reality, the Word and the Meaning. And for that reason, this Voice, this trust and this inevitable assertion, they say, is the real protection and security of our wealth and identity. 
3431 :This holy speech is the gift of divinity for those who come to seek for the gift of it with freedom to propagate it for all. But if the ruler locks it up as his own cherished prerogative and denies to others the rightful access to it, this lock up and denial, they say, is an insult to Brahmanas and a sin against God. 
3432 :One who does not agree to give the divine cow, holy speech of divinity, freely to the seekers and the disciples of Rshis, alienates himself from the divines and intellectuals and suffers the displeasure and disapproval, even wrath, of the Brahmanas, enlightened devotees of knowledge and wisdom. 
3433 :If a person wants to enjoy the pleasure of the Vasha cow, holy speech of divinity, he should have the pleasure some other way than locking it up for himself and arresting its free movement for others, because when someone is unwilling to give it for others when it is asked for, then, refused and hoarded, it destroys the custodian himself. 
3434 :As it is with any pleasureable treasure of wealth, well preserved and well promoted through circulation, so it is with the treasure of the Brahmana’s free knowledge and speech. Whoever the person, whatever the place wherein it takes root and grows in freedom through circulation, the seekers rush to the man and the place for a gift for their share. 
3435 :When the seekers of divine knowledge and speech come to the treasurehold of free speech and knowledge, in fact they come to their own rightful treasure. In such cases, its hoarding and refusal to give is just another way of torturing them for a crime they have not committed. 
3436 :Just as a calf roams around unknown and urecognised for three years and then it is known and recognised and then a Brahmana is sought to take it as a gift, similarly, if knowledge and its medium speech were neglected and left to roam around unknown, unrecognised and unplanned, then, O Narada, guardian of human society for culture and education, sagely scholars must be sought and entrusted with the culture and education of the human community so that free development of the society is properly recognised, Vasha, divine knowledge and speech in freedom, is a treasure gift of divinity for divine sages and scholars. Any one who cynically calls it Avasha, that is, something of no value, Bhava and Sharva, forces of life and death, through mutabiltiy and history, ensnare him and pierce him with arrows of retribution to fall and die out. 
3437 :If one, who does not know the treasure-hold of Vasha’s life giving wealth and the channels and media of the inflow of its vitality, were, fortunately, able to know both these gifts and he were able to give to the sagely teachers and scholars the freedom for the release of the flow of knowledge and speech to the community, Vasha would overflow his life with both light and vitality, in freedom, through the treasure and the media. 
3438 :Vasha, universal light and vitality of life, is indomitable and indefatigable, but it lies dormant with that individual, community or ruler who is unwilling to give and propagate it freely. Whoever does not give it and yet wants to achieve the fruits of it, his desires and ambitions never fructify for him. 
3439 :Having made the Brahmana their voice and leader, the Devas, noble and brilliant sages and scholars of humanity, have prayed for and asked for Vasha, universal knowledge of nature and divinity with freedom of speech. Therefore the man who does not give and expand that knowledge and speech freely for all others suffers the disapproval, displeasure and even wrath of those divinities. 
3440 :If mortal man misappropriates for his own self even that share of divinities which is fixed and set apart for them by divine dispensation and refuses to grant to the Brahmanas, scholars, intellectuals and teachers, the freedom of knowledge and speech, he suffers the wrath not only of divinities and men but even of the animals. 
3441 :If a hundred others, who are dedicated neither to Divinity nor to knowledge nor to speech and freedom, ask the Gopati, lord of knowledge, speech and the earth, for a gift of Vasha, freedom of speech, then, as divine sages have said, Vasha rightly is only for those who are dedicated to Divinity, knowledge and freedom with discipline for the service of all others, not for others. 
3442 :If a person, community or ruler gives the gift of Vasha, freedom of speech, to others than the learned, having refused it to the dedicated and learned, then it is difficult for them to realise the gifts of earth including those of other divinities of nature and humanity in the house. 
3443 :Devas, divine souls, at the earliest prayed and asked for Vasha, universal knowledge and speech, of that Omniscient Spirit in which it first emerged and manifested in thought and Word at the dawn of creation. And that very knowledge, thought and Word, Narada, the man of knowledge and love for humanity, along with other enlightened souls, ought to advance in human society. 
3444 :If this Vasha, loved and sought for by the devotees of knowledge and divinity, is hoarded by any person, locked up as his exclusive love and wealth, and denied to the seekers, then this denial leads that person to utter destitution of wealth and progeny. 
3445 :Brahmanas, seekers of Divinity and knowledge, pray for Vasha for the advancement of Agni and Soma, progress and peace of humanity, for fulfilment of life’s mission, for people of love and friendship, and for people of judgement and discriminative intelligence. The person, individual or ruler, who hoards this divine gift and denies it to the seekers, isolates himself and alienates himself from society although otherwise he may be in the thick of social presence. 
3446 :If a ruler has not himself attentively heard the Rks, let him actively move among the scholars of Vedic verses, and when he has fully heard and realised the Vedic voice, let him not be confined to his personal home, nor should the Vedic Voice be locked up in the royal palace. 
3447 :Having heard and realised the Vasha, Vedic Voice, whoever the person that continues to roam around in the pleasure of the senses, the divinities feel offended and they uproot his life and his life’s wealth of prosperity. 
3448 :Vasha, the Vedic Voice, is the guarded treasure of divine sages and scholars and, in its dynamic state of growth and development through natural media of evolution, gives rise to many new forms of life’s variety while it remains actively living and secure with its Vasha, universal knowledge and the spirit of Being, is a seeker of living media, manifests itself in many forms as it lives with its homely devotees, while, indeed, it inspires the sagely minds for her own selfmanifestation and expression for the sake of the seekers of divinity. 
3449 :Vasha, the spirit of Being and universal awareness, vibrates and acts through the universal mind. That vibration in the universal mind stimulates the sages at the core of their being and imagination, and thereby the seekers of divinity approach Vasha, universal awareness itself, to pray for the gift of her own self. 
3450 :for parents and seniors, by yajna in honour of divinities, and by charity in general, the ruler does not suffer the displeasure of Mother Vasha. 
3451 :Vasha, the Vedic Voice of divine knowledge, is the mother of rules, It has been so since the beginning. When it is freely given to the seekers of knowledge and divinity in the social system, this giving is not called a gift, because giving knowledge and freedom of speech to the Brahmanas is not charity, it is the fulfilment of the ruler’s obligation. 
3452 :Just as the person who takes away the ghrta held in the ladle meant for the fire alienates himself from the fire, so does the person withholding Vasha from the rightful seekers of knowledge and divinity alienate himself as a misappropriator in relation to the light of life. 
3453 :Mother Vasha whose gift is food for life and yajna, who is generous and abundant in milk, stands by this humanity in the world. For one who supports and expands this mother knowledge and freedom of speech for the rightful seekers, she brings streams and showers of the nectar milk of life and fulfils all his desires. 
3454 :Mother Vasha fulfils all desires of the generous man of open mind with love of freedom in the dominion of the ruler and dispenser of law, justice and freedom. And the wise say that the world is an insufferable hell under the rule of a person who blocks the spread of knowledge and denies the basic needs of life and freedom of speech to those who rightfully seek and ask for it. 
3455 :Mother Vasha like a pregnant cow, abundant in the gifts of food for body, mind and soul for all, goes about furious with the ruler who believes that she is barren and utterly unproductive. “Cursed be the man who cries me foul and calls me barren,” she protests, “he deserves to be tied down in the chains of Yama, the Whoever the man or ruler that believes that Vasha, mother giver of the milk of life for body, mind and soul with freedom, is barren, unproductive and miscarrier of life and progress and thus tortures her in his home and dominion, Brhaspati, lord of the expansive world of life and progress, punishes him and even reduces his future generations to the state of poverty and destitution. 
3456 :Like a frustrated cow moving among cows, Vasha, divine knowledge and freedom of speech, scotched yet self-assertive among scholarly sages and intellectuals in a society or dominion, heats up intensely within, and that way it produces but poison for the custodian of life and culture who refuses to grant freedom to the seekers of food for progress and enlightenment. 
3457 :The freedom of speech and knowledge which is granted to the intellectual seekers of divinity and life’s progress is dear also to the people of average understanding and vision. Indeed that freedom is the real favourite of Vasha, divine spirit of knowledge and freedom itself, which is the holy food of divinities in nature and among humanity. 
3458 :That Vasha, mother spirit of divine food, freedom and enlightenment which the divinities received, raised and further developed from cosmic yajna and intellectual gatherings, that very abundant Vasha, that consecrated spirit of life and freedom, now obscured, O Narada, pioneer of knowledge and enlightenment, recover, raise and establish in human society. 
3459 :Devas, divine sages, thought over Vasha, spirit of Being, freedom and knowledge, whether it is Vasha, desirable and manageable, or Avasha, undesirable and beyond control. Then Narada, enlightened sage of humanity, thought and said of it : Of all things worthy of love and desire, this Vasha is most valuable and most manageable (by law and discipline). 
3460 :O Narada, enlightened thinker of humanity for humanity, how many are the kinds of knowledge and freedom born of divinity through the Vedic lore developed by humanity for humanity, of which you know, I ask you. I ask you, O sage, which one of these is that which the man who is not a Brahmana or Brahmachari, who is not dedicated to Divinity and knowledge with the discipline of celibacy, cannot know? O Brhaspati, master, guardian and promoter of knowledge and freedom for life in existence, the man who is indifferent to Divinity and divine values, though deeply dedicated to mundane prosperity, should not, in fact cannot, value and taste the higher pleasures of Vilipti and Sutavasha Vasha, that is, the knowledge and freedom divinely consecrated but humanly obscured, and that which controls the sensual and worldly desires Salutations to you, Narada, enlightened sage. It is fair that the freedom to propagate the knowledge of noble and desirable values enshrined in the Vedic literature be given to the educated and the enlightened. Which of these values is the most sublime and awesome without the pursuit and propagation of which adversity is sure to strike and prevail? O Brhaspati, master, guardian and promoter of knowledge and freedom for life in existence, Vilipti, consecrated but obscured knowledge and freedom unpolluted by hate and attachment, Sutavasha, controller of passions and appetites of men, and Vasha, knowledge and freedom self-disciplined by law and enlightened culture, these are the kinds of knowledge, freedom and values which men indifferent to Divinity and divine values but merged into pleasures of mundane materiality do not and cannot taste and enjoy. 
3461 :Three are the kinds and orders of Vasha, life- giving spirit of knowledge and freedom: Vilipti, consecrated sublime blest by Divinity for saints and sages, Sutavasha, controller of selfish passions and licentious living, and Vasha, discipline and law for healthy living in family and societyThese the ruler should provide to the scholars, sages and leaders of humanity dedicated to Divinity. Such a ruler, such a person, would not feel isolated and alienated in the world of Prajapati, lord creator, father, ruler and sustainer of life and humanity. 
3462 :If Brahmanas, saints, sages and Brahmacharis, ask for this Vasha, life-giving mother knowledge and freedom, the ruler giver should give freely, and when he gives, so should he believe and say: O Brahmanas, this is your rightful share of havi due from us, our homage which, otherwise locked up in the house, works havoc with the non-giver’s life. 
3463 :to Vasha with Rk verses saying, that the ruler denied them the gift of mother knowledge and freedom of speech. Then arose dissension and for that reason the ruler lost the dominion. 
3464 :And Dissension too did not give the gift of mother knowledge and freedom of speech when Indra, divine seeker, asked for it. And for the reason of that sin of denial, the angry divines uprooted and threw out the misappropriator in the battle of pride and selfaggrandisement. 
3465 :Those talkative babblers and mischief mongers who advocate and support the denial of mother knowledge and the ban on freedom of speech, those vile fools by their own stupidity get uprooted and fall to the wrath of Indra, the ruler. 
3466 :and master of mother knowledge and free speech, aside and say : “Do not allow free education and free speech to the people”, fall to the wrathful strike of Rudra by the reason of their own ignorance and foolishness. 
3467 :Whether the Vasha, gift of living knowledge and freedom of speech, is promised or not promised, received as given or taken by force, when the ruler denies and in his own chamber encloses and stifles this life-giving Vasha, cooking his own plans and plots, the crooked man offends the divinities along with the Brahmanas and violates and forfeits the worlds of his own existence. 
3468 :The Divine Cow is the Voice of the Veda, brought into being by Divinity with intense thought and spiritual heat, received by the devotee of Divinity, sustained by the law of truth and righteousness, It is consecrated with Truth, enshrined in grace, surrounded with honour, Founded on its own essential power and potential, enshrined in faith, secured in committed loyalty, rooted in yajna, established as the end and aim of life in existence, And a prelude to Divinity, Brahma, such is the Divine Cow, universal light and message of Omniscience, of which the Brahmana, man of absolute dedication to Brahma, is the trustee. 
3469 :Of that Divine Cow, sacred knowledge and free speech of the Brahmana, if the seizor, Kshatriya, ruler (who really is the protector and promoter) robs the Brahmana, Then his truth and honour, valour and fame, and his hallowed glory, all forsake him. 
3470 :And vigour, and lustre, and patience, and power, and speech, and perception, and judgement, and grace, and Dharma, And piety, and supremacy, and dominion, and economy, and brilliance, and honour, and splendour, and his entire wealth, And his life, and beauty, and name, and fame, and pranic energy, and apana energy, and eye, and ear, and righteousness, and truth, and ritual performances, and works of charity, and progeny, and cattle, All these forsake that Kshatriya who seizes the Divine Cow and deprives the Brahmana of his rightful knowledge and free speech. 
3471 :When this Divine Cow, universal knowledge and free speech, is suppressed and bound as the stormy flood of a river within the banks, then it is terrible, deadly poison, a very killer of the oppressor. 
3472 :Then all terrors, and all deadly dangers of punitive death concentrate in this Divine Cow, nature’s retribution against suppression of universal knowledge and free speech. 
3473 :Then all hard punishments and deadly possibilities for the violator exist vested in it. 
3474 :Then the Divine Cow, seized and suppressed, binds the tormentor of Brahmana, worshipper of divinities, in chains of death and destroys him. 
3475 :Then she is a hundred-fold killer, she is a terror for the violator of Divinity and tormentor of the Divine Cow. 
3476 :Therefore this Divine Cow of the Brahmana is invincible, insuppressible, by clever exploiters. 
3477 :When raised high, it is Vaishvanara, refulgent sun for humanity, but when terrorised, it is thunderbolt. 
3478 :Raising her hoof, she is a strike of thunder, when looked up to with hope and expectation, she is a grand divinity. 
3479 :Looking round, she is the razor’s edge, when bellowing, the roar of thunder. 
3480 :Challenging, she is death of the aggressor, raising and striking her tail, a violent supernatural power. 
3481 :Raising and twisting her ears as if with suspicion, she is fatally moved, pouring fury again and again, she is cancerous and consumptive. 
3482 :In that tubercular condition, she is dangerous as a weapon when she is being milked, when she has been milked, she is a headache, neurosis. 
3483 :destructive, and when she is in contact, she is a formidable adversary. 
3484 :When her mouth is muzzled, she is like an arrow, and when she is tormented or slain, she becomes a calamity. 
3485 :Falling, she is deadly poison, fallen, she is utter darkness. 
3486 :The Divine Cow pursues the violator by his foot steps and destroys the very soul of his life. 
3487 :Immolated, she is hostility and deadly strife, divided and sheared, she is the devourer of children and grand children. 
3488 :stroke of divinities, when grabbed and gulped, she brings adversity and utter destitution. 
3489 :Seized and possessed, she is sin, possessed and degraded, she brings reproach, squalor and violence. 
3490 :Dressed for preparation, she is poison, prepared, she is fever. 
3491 :Being cooked for pleasure and repast, she is sin, cooked and seasoned, she is an evil dream, a nightmare. 
3492 :Being turned, she uproots, turned and carved, she is extinction. 
3493 :By smell, she is delirium, being taken up, she is sorrow, taken up, she is cobra poison. 
3494 :Being seized, she is adversity, taken over, she is the fall, total loss. 
3495 :Being minced, she is nature’s passion and rage bent on destroying, minced and crushed, she is destruction right up from the roots. 
3496 :Brahmagavi is the holy cow of Brahma and the Brahmana, Divine Knowledge and holy speech gifted by God, and the knowledge and freedom of that knowledge and speech received in trust, and guarded by Brahmana and Kshatriya for all mankind. When it is devoured, it cuts off the devourer from this world and the next, the other to which humanity aspires to rise. 
3497 :(Brahma Gavi, Divine Cow: the cow, holy mother giver of the milk of life, the Earth, mother sustainer of life, Knowledge, mother giver of light, and freedom, mother giver of continuous progress, must be protected and promoted, never denied, restrained and destroyed. Consecrated, it saves and blesses, defiled, it Violation and killing of the Divine Cow means self-execution of the violator, carving is strike of the thunderbolt, and arresting or waste is self-decay. 
3498 :Stolen, misappropriated, wrested, it becomes self-denial of life itself for the thief. 
3499 :Violated, the Divine Cow sinks into the violator of Divinity, becomes the fire that eats into his vitals, and ultimately devours him to naught. 
3500 :All his (violator’s) parts of the body, all vital joints, even the very roots of his being, the Divine Cow cuts into pieces. 
3501 :She cuts off all his paternal connections from divinity and humanity, she cuts off all his maternal connections from earth and nature, and reduces him to total alienation from living existence in a state of self- condemnation. 
3502 :Unrestored and denied the word of protection and promotion with security by the Kshatriya, guardian ruler, the Divine Cow destroys all familial relations and all social supports of the violator, denier and destroyer. 
3503 :Violated, the Divine Cow renders the violator homeless, destitute of all his self-possessions, void of kith and kin and even his progeny, alienated from support all round, so that ultimately he goes down self- extinguished. 
3504 :So does the guardian ruler suffer who robs the sagely Brahmana of knowledge and devotion to freedom of speech and misappropriates the Divine Cow unto himself and self-extinction. 
3505 :Instant on the guardian ruler’s fall, vultures flock in and raise a deathly din upon the corpse. 
3506 :And soon after on his cremation women with hair dishevelled enact the dance of death, beating their breast with hands and raising the wail of mourning and loss. 
3507 :Soon after, wolves rush into his homes and secret vaults and raise a deathly howl of loot. 
3508 :And soon after, people ask about him: Is it that same as he was? And nature itself seems to say to the fire, Cut down, cut on, break up, reduce, turn it to dust! O Spirit of nature, assertive force of life, destroy the violator of Brahma, destroy the killer of Divine Cow, divine knowledge and the divine freedom of the Brahmana’s speech. 
3509 :You are the spirit of divinity, called universal cleanser and promoter, a turbulent stream in bounds, but not suppressed. 
3510 :Blazing, burning, warming with life, Brahma’s thunder, Brahmana’s lightning light and freedom. 
3511 :Brahmagavi, razor sharp on the wheel, being death for the violator of the Brahmana’s cow, rush on and on. 
3512 :performance, charities for fulfilment and all their tally of good wishes from the violators of the Brahmama’s divine cow. 
3513 :You pick up the violator of Divine Cow and deliver him up to the chastiser of the violent in the other world of justice and punishment. 
3514 :O inviolable Divine Cow, with the appreciation and praise of the Brahmana, be his firm foundation for stablility and his guide on the way forward to enlightenment and social progress. 
3515 :Be the thunderbolt, fatal arrow, be the deadly poison against sin and the sinfuls. 
3516 :Inviolable Divine Cow, break the head of the violator of divine law, tormentor of the Brahmana trustee of divine knowledge and freedom of speech, perpetrator of sin, re viler of divinities and the wholly impious. 
3517 :May the fire burn the sinner, evil at heart, killed and crushed by you. 
3518 :Pluck off, uproot, cut up, burn, destroy, turn to ash all violators of Divine Cow along with all their supports. 
3519 :Divine, Inviolable, bum the violator of divine knowledge and freedom of speech unto the root. 
3520 :So that the violator of Divine Cow go far beyond the House of judgement to the regions of sinners and perdition. 
3521 :re viler of divine law, tormentor of Brahmana, perpetrator of sin, hater of divinities and the flouter of piety and freedom. 
3522 :Destroy him with the thunderbolt of a hundredfold strike, sharpest burning razor lance of fire. 
3523 :Break his shoulders and crush his head, csfrrfereg •grft^iT -fa ii n Pluck out his growing tantacles and expose his camouflage. 
3524 :Break up his material mass and cut off the links of his network. 
3525 :Crush his solid supports and suck out his basic supplies of power and energy. 
3526 :Thus break up all parts and unscrew all the connections of his infrastructure. 
3527 :Let the funeral fire consume him and throw him up from earth into air with the heat of flames. 
3528 :Let the wind blow him out of the vast firmament over to the heights of space. 
3529 :Let the sun throw him out of the solar region and burn him to extinction. 
3530 :(Let the violator of Divine Cow, divine law, divine knowledge, freedom of divine speech, be nonexistent. That is the ideal of a happy, free, progressive and enlightened human society.) Rise, O mighty one, Vajin, who rule the people’s will at heart, and take on to the high office of this Rashtra, social order of truth, beauty and goodness, And may Rohita, the Glorious One, Lord Supreme, self- refulgent as the sun, who created and pervades the dynamics of nature and actions of humanity, sustain and support you in a state of equipoise. 
3531 :(The mantras in this sukta are to be interpreted in relation to the Lord Supreme, the Sun, and the ruler of the Rashtra according as the context emerges in the mantra.) Vaja, mighty one, who is the heart core of the people’s will, has come up. O Ruler, rise as the first among these people who are your equals like brothers and sisters, and, bearing the peace and pleasures of soma for this Rashtra, settle in order the lands, cultures and traditions, the bipeds and the quadrupeds. 
3532 :You brave and stormy Marut warriors, children of the colourful earth, friends and associates of Indra, ruler and commander of the fighting forces, crush the enemies of life and humanity. And may Rohita, Lord ruler Supreme, listen to you, Maruts, generous givers, warriors of thrice seven orders, creative participants in the inspiring congregation of the defence of motherland. 
3533 :Rohita, ruler of blazing glory like the sun, has risen and presides over the new developments and, like a child, wins the affection of the mother powers of the nation. So loved by the people, the wide earthly realm of six directions welcomes him who, then, watching O man, it is the ruler refulgent as the sun who has brought the organised order of the Rashtra for you here on earth, removed the violent away, and consequently there is freedom from fear all round. May the heaven and earth with generous showers of divine power and favour bless you with fulfilment of your desires and ambitions. 
3534 :O man, O ruler, Rohita, self-refulgent lord creator, brought the heaven and earth into being. Therein Parameshthi Prajapati, lord of life and living beings, evolved and extended the web of life. There pervaded and abided the eternal, unborn, sole self-sustained lord divine Aja and firmed up the heaven and earth in space. 
3535 :Rohita, self-refulgent lord creator, fixed and firmed the heaven and earth in orbit. It is by him the heaven of bliss is sustained, by him are the middle regions and space comprehended, and by him the divine sages attain the immortal nectar of bliss. 
3536 :Self-manifested Rohita, self-refulgent creator, having integrated the emerging and evolving materials of nature, reflected on the blue-print of the universe from the beginning to the end. May the Lord, having ascended to the highest heaven with his greatness, bless your dominion with milk and ghrta to the full. 
3537 :O Lord self-refulgent, all your evolutions of nature, all forms of nourishment and energy, all forms of development and progress with which you fill and overflow heaven and earth, are for the children of your creation. O sun, O ruler, O man, growing and rising with this nectar milk and divine message of theirs, keep awake and alert in the dominion and human community of Rohita, Lord Refulgent, the sun and the ruler. 
3538 :O Ruler, your people, who have risen to a developed state of culture and education in life through austere discipline and have attained their present status in pursuance of Gayatri and the divine message of Gayatri, may, we pray, through their peaceful mind and mother Gayatri, win your love and confidence with loyalty, and may Rohita, self-refulgent lord, cherished worship of Gayatri, bless them with love and favour in real presence. 
3539 :Rohita, lord supreme over all, abides in the highest state of bliss in existence. He, ever young beyond age, omniscient poetic creator, creates and shapes all forms of the universe. With fiery splendour of divinity, he shines in the highest heaven of Satya and Sattva beyond darkness and opacity, and creates, shapes and moves the dearest and most glorious objects in nature and humanity. 
3540 :Lord of infinite rays of radiant light, giver of abundant showers of vitality and divine bliss, pervading, knowing and watching every thing in existence, served and worshipped with oblations of ghrta, seat as well as sustainer of peace and divine joy, holily most potent, may, I pray, never forsake me, nor must I, O Lord, ever turn off from you. Give me wealth of lands, cows and culture, bless me with strength and sensitivity of mind and senses, a strong community of the brave all round, and a long line of progeny worthy of the brave. 
3541 :Rohita, self-refulgent lord of glory as the Sun, is the originator and the original voice of creative and karmic yajna. I offer oblations of homage to Rohita in yajna with words while I chant the sacred mantras, with my mind while I meditate on the divine presence. Sages of divine mind and spirit, happy at heart, rise and reach the divine light and presence of Rohita. May the same lord of the creative yajna of evolution and social progress raise me with steady steps of elevation of my body, mind and soul to join and contribute my yajnic part in the assembly and other important congregations for the progress of humanity. 
3542 :Vishvakarma with his divine vibration of thought sankalpa initiated the cosmic yajna of creative evolution. Mother Nature with divine pervasion, Rohita, the sun, and the ruler organise and extend the yajna of natural and social evolution onwards in the service of the lord supreme, Vishvakarma. From that yajna and this extension come to me all these brilliant gifts of light, comfort and dignity. O lord, O sun, O rulers, in this grand spectacle of existence from the macrocosmic to the microcosmic dynamics of yajna, I sing and celebrate your basic and central glory and majesty. 
3543 :O Jataveda, lord all-pervasive and omniscient, hymns of the Veda in Brhati metre, in Pankti, in Kakup, all with their divine beauty and grace rise to you in homage and celebrate your glory. So do Ushnik hymns, word by word, letter by letter, rise to you and celebrate your glory. So does the Vashatkara offer you homage of celebration. And so does Rohita, the refulgent sun, with its living light and vitality, shine in celebration of your glory and rises to honour you. 
3544 :This Rohita, self-refulgent Supreme Divine pervades, energises and vitalises the earth’s womb of fertility, it pervades and illuminates the heaven and the firmament, and it pervades and divinizes the highest regions of bliss on top of the regions of the sun. 
3545 :be kind and pleasant to us, let the bed be comfortable and restful for us, let the home be full of peace and joy. Here itself let pranic energy be friendly and energising for us. O Lord Supreme, let Agni, leading light of life, hold on to you with all his brilliance and do you homage with th dedication of his life and work. 
3546 :O Vachaspati, lord of divine speech, let the five seasons, shaped by Vishvakarma, maker of the universe, with five elements, which affect us all round, be good and favourable to us ruler and the people. Throughout these seasons here, let pranic energy too be friendly and energising for us. O Lord Supreme, let the brilliant ruler, Rohita, as the refulgent sun, hold on to you with all his splendour and do you homage with the dedication of his life. (Of the seasons, shishir and hemanta may be taken as one, the cold season.) O Vachaspati, lord of divine speech, let our mind be noble and cheerful with good intentions and will. Let noble speech be generated in our assemblies. Let noble children be bom in our families, and fertile cows be produced in our stalls and meadows. Here itself let pranic energy be favourable and friendly for us. O Lord Supreme, I, the ruler as well as the individual, dedicate myself to you with all my power and intelligence for all my life time. 
3547 :O man, O ruler, may self-refulgent Savita, creator and inspirer lord divine, protect, inspire and sustain you all round. May Agni, light and fire of life, bless you with valour, passion and splendour. Let Mitra and Varuna, prana and apana energies with love and judgement, with enthusiasm, maintain you with wisdom and vitality. Let all adversities and deprivations be far out of the commonwealth of humanity. And may you thus make the dominion a social embodiment of truth and law of freedom and conscience under the divine umbrella. 
3548 :O Rohita, O Ruler, O man, whom the leading creative and dynamic forces of the nation exalt and advance in the dominion like a leading team of horse driving the ruler’s chariot on wart, you move forward, higher and higher, along auspicious lines, releasing streams of energy and action on the national scale and leaving a glorious trail of progress and prosperity behind. 
3549 :Rohini committed to Rohita, Prakrti committed to Parameshvara, nation committed to the ruler, woman committed to the head of the family, these are brave and inspiring, noble in form and performance, far and wide across lands and spaces, brilliantly wise and valorous. By these, let us accomplish the war-like programmes of national development of all forms and hues, let us win over all battle forces of life in the world against the adversaries of negative character. 
3550 :This house of the people is the ruling leader’s seat of power, and this people’s power, Rohini, is the real strength and foundation of the ruler, and that policy and programme decided in the house is the path by which the leading power of the nation advances to progress and achievement. And this leading power of the nation, the people and the policy, Gandharvas, sagely scholars of divine speech, and Kashyapas, enlightened leaders of the nation, preserve in tradition and raise higher, and that very culture, character and tradition, poets and artists celebrate, protect and promote, continuously, without relent and doubt or question. 
3551 :Just as the radiant light-horses of the sun’s chariot, nectarous flag-bearers of solar power, draw on the comfortable chariot of the sun, and the sun, Rohita, generous and refulgent, vests the light rays and pervades the heavenly regions, sprinkling the earth from there with the ghrta of energy and heat of life, so do the people, policies and programmes of the nation, radiant flag bearers and motive forces of the social order and the rule of governance, always draw the nation’s chariot of peace and nectarous glory without relent, and the ruling leader, nation’s genius, blazing in majesty, generous and creative, sprinkling the earth with ghrta showers of peace and prosperity, pervades, informs and inspires the nation and her children with the pride and dignity of Rohita, self-refulgent lord supreme of infinite rays of light, most potent and generous, who rules over the fire and the sun, who sustains heaven and earth, is he, from whose power and inspiration the divine forces of nature and brilliant creative human geniuses create and shape the many forms of existence, art and science. 
3552 :Rohita, refulgent sun, evolving from the mighty ocean of particles, rose to heaven, and all-creative Lord Self-refulgent, Supreme Rohita, pervades and transcends over all emergent forms of existence. 
3553 :is the sacred cow of the Divinities. Study it, know it, measure it for your purpose, it is overflowing with water, milk and ghrta. Let Indra, the ruler and the nation of humanity, drink the nectar soma of her gifts. Let Agni, the leading scholar, study and describe it with praise and exaltation. O man, drive out all enemies opposotions, polluters and destroyers of earth and the environment. 
3554 :Let Agni, the ruler, the leading lights of life, the fire of life and passion for purity, lighted up, fed with ghrta, raised up in flames, burning and blazing challenger, all evil destroyer, throw out and destroy all those negativities that are our enemies. 
3555 :Let Agni, ruling light and fire, burn off these enemies, burn whoever the enemy that attacks us with a fighting force. We burn the destructive enemies and adversaries with deathly fire. 
3556 :Indra, ruling power and defence force armed with thunder, throw down and destroy the enemies with the strike of thunderbolt. And I too subdue and control my fighting adversaries with the heat and blaze of fire. 
3557 :O Agni, ruling and fighting force of fire, throw down and crush our destructive adversaries. O Brhaspati, lord of divine speech and wisdom, bring to naught the rebellious rivals even in our own ranks. O Indragni, ruling power and leading light of humanity, O Mitra and Varuna, powers of love and judgement, let our enemies fall down, their ambition, anger and enmity turned futile. 
3558 :O refulgent sun, brilliant ruler, rising in power and justice, eliminate our destructive rivals and adversaries. Destroy these enemies with the arms of thunder. Let them fall to deepest darkness and oblivion. 
3559 :Darling child of the cosmic mother form, mighty virile and generous, firmly based in light and purity, rises on top of the firmament and moves to the heart and love of the sagely wise. Sages and people do homage with ghrta to the adorable darling of their love, and mighty great as he is, highest among humanity, they exalt him with hymns of the Veda. 
3560 :O Ruler, O ruling spirit of man, enlightened soul, rise to the heaven, rise and win over the earth, rise and rule over the dominion, rise, attain and rule over the knowledge, power and wealth of the world, rise and raise a noble family, rise and have a taste of the ecstasy of immortality, and with a union of the self with the light of eternity be free beyond mortality. 
3561 :Those divine souls who are brilliant and generous and all round rise to the sun without reservation are sustainers and burden-bearers of the social order. Let Rohita, the ruler, happy and noble at heart, knowing, meeting and winning their cooperation, rule and maintain the governance and administration of the social order. 
3562 :O Rohita, divine spirit of man, brilliant ruler, the yajnas sanctified by Veda and blest by Divinity raise you high. Purified senses, mind and intelligence, noble sages on the path divine, all take you forward, thereby you cross the earthly sea and spatial ocean and shine beyond in the light of Divinity. 
3563 :Heaven and earth are sustained in Rohita, self- refulgent Brahma, supreme ruler over living planets, stars and galaxies, and master of the entire wealth of matter, energy and intelligence in existence. Thousands are his created forms of life, seven the orders of universe, in the midst of the dynamics of which and over the farthest borders of which, the ruling lord is Brahma. Of that Lord and Master, of that centre-hold of existence, immanent and transcendent in and over all, I sing, That I celebrate. 
3564 :O Sun, honoured and adored, you sojourn over and across space and sub-spaces in all directions and subdirections. Honoured and adored, you vibrate among living beings and moving humanity. O Lord Supreme, I pray, let me too, like the sun, with honour and fame, be loved and esteemed in the lap of mother earth and the imperishable Prakrti. 
3565 :O Lord Supreme, O Sun, being there you know, see and illuminate every thing here, and being here, you know and see every thing there. The wise sages, however, from here only, see and realise the refulgent Sun, omniscient and illuminant, there in the heaven of light. 
3566 :The supreme self-refulgent Brahma moves, illuminates and reveals the divine gifts of Its potential, Prakrti, and pervades and rolls in the bottomless ocean of existence. Poets and creative visionaries of the highest order know and realise that Brahma who also kindles the fire and the sun, his version in reflection, akin. 
3567 :Bearing this lower, tangible form of existential reality by that higher intangible presence of essential Reality by immanence, and bearing that higher, intangible presence of essential Reality by this lower, tangible form of existential reality by reflection, the Gau (‘Cow’, Prakrti, Divine Speech) yet rises above the expressive medium of form. Where from does it come? To which self-sufficient, self-existent presence and power does it retire? Where at all in the created world of existence does it abide? Not, of course, in the multitude of humanity. 
3568 :(Shvetashvatara Upanishad (1,7) describes the ultimate Reality as Brahma which comprises a threefold Brhadaranyaka Upanishad (2, 3,1) describes the existential version of Brahma as twofold: Murtta (concrete), and Amurtta (abstract). The existential Tapas (acti-vity) of Brahma is articulated in Rgveda, 10, 190, 1-3. 
3569 :‘I am Brahma’ (Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, 1, 4, 10). It moves to thought and desire with the divine intention, Sankalpa, to create the many forms of existence (Ibid. 1, 4, 17). The existential extentional activity then is: awareness, thought, and form. Thought is abstract (Amurtta), and form is concrete (Murtta). The Amurtta-and-Murtta expresses itself through two media: Prakrti and Speech. The concrete prakrtic form is the universe, the tangible speech form is Veda. 
3570 :Prakrti bears this universe by the self-conscious presence of That Brahma through Its immanence; and it bears that Brahma by this universe through Its reflection in the universe. So the concrete, tangible, universe is a reflection of Brahma, and Brahma is the abstract Spirit of the universe. Prakrti is the medium in both cases, and still Prakrti transcends the universe, its concrete mode, just as Brahma transcends its immanence as well as its reflection in the universe. 
3571 :Similarly speech is the medium of divine Brahma-awareness, and Veda is the articulation, in speech form, of that awareness. Speech is the medium in both cases, of awareness and of the articulation. And still Speech transcends the Veda, its tangible form, as awareness transcends the expression in words and Brahma transcends Its immanence and reflection in the universe. 
3572 :For futher thought, deep reflection on Jag ad Brahma and Shabda-Brahma is suggested.) This speech, the holy ‘Cow’, evolves, corresponding to the evolution of Prakrti and life, by one step, two steps, four steps, eight steps, nine steps, and still evolves over many more. It evolves over a thousand imperishable elements in correspondence with the evolution of the universe and the interaction of humanity and its environment. From this as from Prakrti flow out oceans, oceans of existence and treasures of knowledge of infinite divine awareness, words and meanings. 
3573 :(The steps of the evolution of Prakrti, as those of corresponding speech, are to be worked out from Mahat, the first existential mode of indescribable Prakrti, to the two, Mahat and Ahankara, then to four, Mahat, Ahankara, Tanmatras and mind-sense complex, then to eight, five gross elements from ether to earth, herbs, food, and vitality, and then to nine, extending to the evolution of life forms. 
3574 :Another suggestion is: One, Prakrti, two, Prakrti and Purusha; four, mana, buddhi, chitta and ahankara (mind, intelligence, memory and I-sense or sense of identity); eight, the eight chakras or centres of vital energy and awareness; and nine, the ‘nine-door’ entrances and exits of the human bodily system. Sahasrakshara Pankti is the boundless expansion of galaxies, stars and planets and the corresponding words of speech.) Lord Immortal and Eternal, rising and refulgent in the heavenly regions of light, may, I pray, listen, honour and justify my words of prayer which, O Lord, these yajnic performances sanctified by Vedic hymns carry to you as rays of the sun on their destined course conduct the light to the world. 
3575 :Lord of Immortality and Eternity, I know and realise your emergence and radiance in the highest region of light and your seat of presence which is in the ultimate haven of bliss. 
3576 :The Sun looks through and even beyond the highest region of light, the Sun shines over the earth and beyond, and the Sun penetrates through and beyond the waters and particles of space and the will and actions of humanity. The Sun is the one, only and unique eye of all living beings in existence, and the sun ascends to the highest heaven of space in existence. 
3577 :The expansions of vast space are borders of cosmic yajna, of which the earth is formed as vedi. Thereon Rohita, Lord Supreme, the Sun, has placed these fires of cold-and-heat in creative complementarity. 
3578 :Having placed the double fires of cold and heat in the earthly vedi, and having made the mountains as yajna posts of accomplishment, Rohita conducts the yajna, and the two fires, rain as medium of cold and ghrta as fuel of fire, conduct the creative yajna of Rohita, the spirit of existential bliss. 
3579 :The original creative fire of the existential yajna of Rohita, lord and spirit of cosmic bliss, is kindled, raised and conducted with simultaneous chant of Vedic hymns. And from that yajnic fire arises heat, thence cold, and thence arises the whole process of the yajna of creative evolution. 
3580 :The complementary fires of cold and heat, called up into emergence by Brahma, kindled by Brahma, raised by Brahma and continued by Brahma with the simultaneous chant of Brahma-Veda carry on the creative evolutionary yajna of refulgent Rohita, Lord and Spirit of existential bliss. 
3581 :One fire of the two is placed in truth and commitment with knowledge and faith, the other is placed in the waters, dynamics of will and action, and these two fires lighted, raised and continued by Brahma with Brahma, carry on the creative yajna of Rohita, Lord and Spirit of existential bliss. 
3582 :That auspicious energy of cool which Vata, the wind, beatifies and empowers, and that fire which Indra, the sun, Brahmanaspati, lord of might, light and truth emblazes, these two fires, lighted and raised by Brahma, carry on the yajna of Rohita, lord and spirit of existential bliss and beauty. 
3583 :Having made earth as vedi and heaven as dakshina, the ritual gift, and the sun as fire with its complementarity of cool such as the moon, Rohita, lord and spirit of existential beauty and bliss, made the world evolve to a living entity with a soul, with the vitality of rain and ghrta. 
3584 :Agni, light of life, creator of cosmic yajna, created heat, ghrta and rain, made the earth into vedi, and, thereby on the earth, Agni created and shaped the high mountains with the chant of divine hymns of the Veda. 
3585 :Having created the high mountains with the hymns of Veda, Rohita, lord of life and light, spoke to earth: On you and in you may arise the life forms of all that ever was and whatever is yet to be. 
3586 :That Yajna, adorable supreme creator, first self- mainfested as all that ever was and shall be. From that arose all this that is and all that shines, sustained by omniscient creator Rohita. 
3587 :Whoever desecrates the Gau, the cow, the earth, the environment, Nature, the Vedic Voice, and hurts it with the foot, whoever reviles the sun in front, I dissever him, O man, from the root of life, there shall be no growth, no branch, no leaf, no shade, nothing around. 
3588 :And you that violate me in the shade of divinity, or stand between me and the yajnic fire, I dissever you from the root of life, there shall be no growth, no branch, no leaf, no shade, nothing around. 
3589 :O divine Sun, whoever now stands as obstruction between you and me, we cleanse him of all evil dreams, dirt and evil thought and will in him, or, otherwise, we wash ourselves of him as such. 
3590 :O Lord, Indra, let us not deviate from the divine path, let us not forsake the divine Soma-yajna, let no negativities and deprivations be and last in us. 
3591 :That thread of living unity, sustainer of the yajnic web of existence, running extended throughout cosmic divinities and humanity, which is invoked, enkindled and sustained by Rohita, Lord Supreme Self-Refulgent, let us serve and sustain among ourselves and between ourselves, Mother Nature and the divine Speech. 
3592 :The rays, radiations and illuminations of this Sun in high heaven, Aditya version of Imperishable Eternity, universal watchful of humanity, observant follower of the laws of cosmic divine order, potent and generous, rise on high, shine and radiate, pure, powerful and blazing in glory. (The Sun is a metaphor of Lord Supreme who is described as Aditya in Yajurveda, 32, We celebrate in song the Sun, protector and sustainer of the world, who, with his rays, irradiates, illumines and enlightens all quarters of space, with his light he proclaims the relative position of the lighted directions, and, like a celestial bird, instantly flies over the infinite oceans of time and space (the self-refulgent lord being omnipresent and eternally existent). 
3593 :We celebrate you, O Sun, who swiftly go over east and west by your own essential power, create different forms of day and night with your wondrous presence. And that, O Aditya, is your great glory, and that is your high renown since by your sole self you shine over the entire world. 
3594 :We celebrate the Sun, all-watching, all saving, glorious blazing, whom seven abundant lights irradiate over all quarters of space, whom Attri, Lord omnipotent, free from the three limitations of space, time and mutability, raised from the cosmic ocean of particles to heaven, where, O refulgent Sun, people see you moving in your orbit, victorious in your warlike mission. 
3595 :Let no one stop you on your course, going on your mission. Go on fast, O Sun, and win your castles of victory peacefully for the good of life, you that go on counting over days and nights, shining over heaven and the heavenly earth. 
3596 :O Sun, all well for your moving chariot by which you relentlessly go over both the bounds of your orbit. All well for you whom your varied lights of a hundred horse-power or, may be, seven abundant lights, transport on the way across space. 
3597 :O Sun, ascend the chariot, comfortable, bright, beautiful, mighty powerful and exceedingly fast. And all well for you whom your varied lights of a hundred horse-power or, say, seven abundant lights irradiate on way across the world. 
3598 :The sun has yoked seven varied mighty radiant lights of golden hue to its chariot to move on..Pure, powerful and bright, it dispels darkness far off beyond the earth and its atmosphere and, having left it there, rises high to the Zenith in heaven. 
3599 :The divine Sun has come and risen with mighty expansive light. It has dispelled the darkness and now, abundant as it is with light, it diffuses the rays. The refulgent child of imperishable mother Nature, brave celestial bird of radiant wings, now illuminates all the worlds of the universe. 
3600 :Rising, O divine Sun, you spread the rays of light and nourish all forms of life with energy and pranic vitality. Lord over all, shining with self-refulgence and acts of divinity, you enlighten the people and all regions of the world and vest both oceans of earth and sky with splendour. 
3601 :These two children of Nature, sun and the moon, playing, shining and moving one after the other, by the mysterious power and law of Divinity, range over the depth and vastness of the spatial ocean. One of them, the sun, watches and illuminates all regions of the world, and the other, the moon, radiations of the sun bear and carry with their golden beams. 
3602 :O sun, the Lord Supreme, Attri, above threefold limitations of time, space and mutability, placed you high in heaven for the division of time into year and months in relation to earth and moon in motion. There placed accurately in position and well borne in law, shining, irradiating and blazing, watching and illuminating all forms of existence, you go on in your fixed orbit, giving them their warmth of life. 
3603 :O sun, you reach both the extremities of your orbit, just as a child going to its father and mother both, (you maintain the will of Attri and the law of Nature). 
3604 :And this eternal mystery and law of nature and Divinity, those sages have known who have been long long even before now. (The law is eternal, the cycle of existence is eternal, and the knowledge of the law and cycle of existence too is eternal.) Whatever is implicit in the infinite creativity of Divinity, that the sun shares and wants to give. Great is the path of its motion and bestowal, spread far and wide, full and more, now and beyond, last and later, ever on. 
3605 :That infinite share of it, it receives from Divinity on way by its own dynamics of nature. From there, and from that path, it never deviates. By that very path and that relentless sincerity, it never restrains, never withholds, the rightful share of the divinities from Nature, (it gives, freely, profusely, because it receives freely and profusely only for that purpose.) That watchful sun, divine illuminant of all things in existence, that infinite giver, the radiations of cosmic energy bear and carry on, and that, the rays of light irradiate for all the world to see (for their own benefit). 
3606 :And those stars, which love to be with the nights to steal the light of the sun and shine, disappear at dawn so that the world may see the sun and share the light. 
3607 :The banners of the lord of sun beams, the rays of the sun, are seen in the world of humanity blazing like explosions of fire in heaven. 
3608 :O Sun, you are the saviour, redeemer from darkness, illuminator of the world, light giver even for lights of the world. You shine over the world, beautiful, glorious. 
3609 :O Sun, light of the world, to the noblest powers of nature and humanity, to the people in the business of life, to the people in general, you rise directly and reveal your presence so that the world might see the light divine directly by their own experience. 
3610 :Lord purifier and sanctifier, lord of light and judgement, with the eye with which you watch the mighty world of dynamic activity, holding every thing in equipoise, with the same kind and benign eye, watch and bless us. 
3611 :O Sun, watching the species of various forms and traversing the wide worlds of existence by days and nights, you move to the regions of light and heaven. 
3612 :O Sun, self-refulgent lord of blazing flames, light and universal illumination, seven are the colourful lights of glory which, like seven horses, draw your chariot of time across space and the history of mankind. 
3613 :In the same way seven are the channels, metres of poetry and vision, which reveal the light of Divinity in the sacred verses of Veda. 
3614 :The sun, bright and illuminant, yokes seven pure, immaculate, purifying and infallible sun beams like horses to his chariot of time and motion, and with these self-yoked powers moves on across the spaces to the regions of light and bliss. 
3615 :So does the Lord of the Universe with his laws and powers of Prakrti move the world as his own chariot of creative manifestation. 
3616 :Rohita, self-refulgent light of life, the Sun, burning and blazing with its own creative and energising light and warmth of life, rises to the heavenly heights of the universe. It rises to the origin of all originative causes, takes its own self manifestive birth with things born again and again, and still remains the same highest ordainer of the divine forces of nature and noble humanity. 
3617 :All watching with cosmic eyes, all speaking with cosmic voice, all protecting with cosmic arms, and all reaching with infinite cosmic presence, the sole, self- refulgent creator of heaven and earth shapes and controls the universe with the hands of his thought and will with strokes of natural forces forging things into form and sustaining them in life. 
3618 :The One sole, self-existent Brahma exceeds the twofold created world of Purusha and Prakrti, more and ever more. In the process of creative evolution the twofold world of Purusha and Prakrti follows up to the threefold world of Purusha, Prakrti and Jiva, more and ever more. The twofold world of Purusha and Prakrti exceeds the six dimensional world of pure Prakrti. Ultimately, the twofold threefold, sixfold, all abide within the One, sole, self-existent, all transcendent Brahma. 
3619 :Relentless, ever awake, ever on the move, when the Sun shines radiating its rays of light, the shining glory creates two forms of existence: the day where it shines and the night where it does not. O Aditya, imperishable Aditi’s own mutation as embodiment of light, commanding your banners of sun beams, overwhelming and crossing regions of the worlds in space, you shine over all places high or low from the heights of heaven. 
3620 :O Surya, inspirer of life with life energy, truly you are great. O Aditya, child of imperishable mother Nature, surely you are unassailable, your grandeur is greater than greatness itself, O Aditya, child of divine Shakti, you are great beyond all possibility of challenge O divine Sun, cosmic Bird of light on high in space, you shine in heaven, you shine in the firmament, you shine on earth, and you shine in the dynamics of nature and humanity, inspiring them all. You pervade in the season earth and in the oceans of space with your light and energy. O divine Refulgence, you are divinity in the mode of light, great, virile and generous, winner and giver of light and heavenly joy. 
3621 :Closest from the farthest, ever on the move on way, instant in action, all enlightened, Bird of light on cosmic wings, all pervasive, all aware, abiding by your own potential, you rule over the dynamic universe with your self-manifested power and glory. 
3622 :Sublime, intelligent, great, all sustainer, the Sun abides, illuminating heaven, earth and the firmament. Both day and night, wearing the glory of the Sun, exalt the universal grandeur and cosmic exploits of this Sun. 
3623 :Sharp with lazer beams of light, blazing in glory, raising the scorching sharpness of its rays, instant reacher far and near at ease, illuminating and advancing high and low, self-refulgent, all round radiant, great, treasurehold of life and sustenance, the sun abides, shaping, informing and irradiating all quarters of space in the world. 
3624 :Wondrous banner of divinities, life elevating, self-refulgent, pure, powerful and radiant harbinger of the day, the inspiring sun, rising over quarters of space, has dispelled all evils and darknesses of the world far The sun, wondrous banner of divinities, abundant light of life, the eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni, love, judgement and fire of Divinity, is risen, and it has filled the heaven and earth and the sky with its glorious light. It is indeed the very life and soul of the moving and the unmoving world. 
3625 :We see you, O Sun, rising high to glory and crimson magnificence, a divine Bird of life with the gift of light, blazing and floating like a saving ark of Divinity in the midst of heavenly space, giver and harbinger of life, energy and inspiration, whom poets and sages call imperishable light of Eternity, which Attri, Lord Supreme free from time, space and mutability, created and gifted to life of the world. 
3626 :Smothered by the pressures of life around, yearning for fulfilment of my life’s mission and purpose, I come and pray to the Sun, self-refulgent child of Imperishable mother Eternity, flying high in space on top of heaven like a celestial Bird of infinite wings of will and action. May the Sun give us long life and good health, may we never come to harm and injury, and may we, O Lord, ever enjoy your love and good will. 
3627 :Over a thousand days (infinite in dimensions) are spread the wings of the will and action of the celestial Sun, saviour spirit and redeemer from the oppressions of life, which flies over and beyond the borders of time and space on the path of eternal freedom. Having taken over all divine forces of nature and humanity unto its heart, watching all worlds of existence, it flies on and on. 
3628 :Rohita, the highest Lord of glory, became, i.e., generated and pervaded, and pervades existential time and is the Time Absolute. Rohita is Prajapati, the first, Original creator, generator and sustainer of the world and life in existence. Rohita is the one absolute deity of yajna, in fact Yajna Itself of the universe, and Rohita is eternal Bliss and freedom of Moksha. 
3629 :Rohita is the world in existence as the sun is itself the earthly world, Rohita gives the light and fire to the solar region, and Rohita radiates over earth and the seas with its rays. 
3630 :Rohita, sojourns with and over space in all quarters, Rohita is the presiding deity of the regions of heaven, and Rohita sustains and protects the solar region, the sea, the earth and all forms of existence all ways. 
3631 :Mighty is Rohita, mighty intelligent, all aware. Relentless and ever alert, it rises over all expansive directions of space and, shining and illuminating, it creates two forms of bright days and dark nights. Wondrous of action, it gives velocity to the wind and while moving it illuminates the worlds of existence. 
3632 :Mighty Sun, forming time by day and night, shines over one half of the earth and folds the other half away into the dark. Prayerful and devoted, we invoke the sun, pervading in the world, and thereby knowing and guiding us on the ways of the world. 
3633 :prayerful, inviolable, all-watchful, the Sun rules supreme over the world. Watching the world with favour, kindly knowing and accepting, adorable, may the Lord, I pray, listen to what I say in prayer and adoration. 
3634 :Blazing with splendour as the Sun is, the Lord’s glory shines over earth and the seas, over heaven and the firmament. Watching every thing wholly and favourably, kindly knowing, all adorable, may the Lord, I pray, listen to what I say in prayer and adoraton. 
3635 :As the abundant cow is awake at the rise of dawn, so the fire is lit and rises with fuel and ghrta offered by yajnic people. As trees shoot up their branches, leaves and tendrils, so the rays of the Sun rise high to reach the heaven of bliss and beauty. (So do enlightened people rise to the light of heaven and the He that created this heaven and earth, who pervades these worlds of existence as if wearing them as garments, in whom abide all the six vast quarters of space which the sun watches and illuminates, to that Lord, that person is an offensive sinner who assails a Brahmana, man of God, knowing the Lord thus celebrated. 
3636 :O Rohita, lord of glory, shake up that person, punish him down, throw the snares of justice and retribution round the Brahmana-oppressor. 
3637 :From whom the winds blow according to the seasons, from whom the oceans flow, to that Lord, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana knowing the Lord thus celebrated. 
3638 :Who gives death and also gives the breath of life, from whom all worlds of existence receive their life and life energy, to that Lord Supreme, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana knowing the Brahma. 
3639 :O Rohita, Ruler risen high, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, throw the snares of justice and retribution round the Brahmana-violator. 
3640 :Who fills and replenishes heaven and earth with the energy of prana, and fills up the depth of ocean with the energy of apana, to that Lord Supreme, that person is an affensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, knower of Brahma in truth. 
3641 :O Rohita, high risen Ruler, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3642 :In whom the Supreme Parameshthi of the regions of light, Prajapati, life giving air of the middle region and the earthly fire version of universal energy, all with their expansive but defined functions, repose, and who withdraws the life energy of far off things and the splendour of highest realities at the end, to that Lord Supreme, that person is an offensive sinner who violates O Rohita, high risen Ruler, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of justice and correction to the Brahmana-violator. 
3643 :In whom, six wide directions of space, five elements of Prakrti, all four classes of humanity and four versions of human action, three vyahrtis of yajna and three syllables of AUM abide, who with awful eye watches everything between heaven and earth, to that Lord Supreme, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana who knows Brahma in truth. 
3644 :O Rohita, high risen Ruler, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and correction to the Brahmana-violator. 
3645 :He that is the cosumer, creator, protector and promoter of the food of life, he that is the originator, preserver and promoter of Vedic knowledge and enlightenment, he that is the lord and master of past, future and all that is going on at present, to that Lord Supreme, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3646 :O Rohita, Ruler high risen and brilliant, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and correction to the Brahmana- violator. 
3647 :The One lord and master who measures the thirty day month counted by day-night cycle, he that shapes and ordains the thirteenth month of the lunar year, to that supreme lord that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3648 :O Rohita, Ruler high risen and brilliant, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and correction to the Brahmana- violator. 
3649 :Sun rays of golden wings wearing vestments of water vapours rise to the regions of the sun, centre of solar gravitation, drawing, holding and ordaining the motions of planets and planetary atmospheres. They turn back to the earth from the sun, house of waters and the centre seat of the law of the solar-planetary system. To that divine presence of Brahma in the sun and the solar system, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3650 :O Rohita, Ruler high risen and self-refulgent, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the snares of justice and retribution to the Brahmana- violator. 
3651 :O Kashyapa, lord divine of universal eye allwatching, beautiful, gracious and refulgent is your glory, which is the concentrated, abundant and wondrous sun of radiant light in which are integrated the various mutations of seven rays of the spectrum. To that presence of yours, Brahma reflected in the sun, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3652 :O Rohita, Ruler risen high and self-refulgent, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and correction to the Brahmana- violator. 
3653 :First Brhat, vast space, wears the divine vestment of Brahma, then after, the floating stars and planets wear the power and glory of the Supreme power and continue to move with Divinity relentlessly with divine energy through their light and motion. To that presence of Brahma reflected in space, stars and planets, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3654 :O Rohita, Ruler risen high and self-refulgent, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and correction to the Brahmana- violator. 
3655 :Brhat, infinite constancy of Prakrti, the unbounded vastness of space and the boundless meaning of Sama, is one aspect of Brahma in existence, and the Rathantaram mutability of Prakrti and the inspiring power of Soma, is another aspect, and the two in complementarity comprehend, ordain, energise and direct the dynamics of the universe. 
3656 :To that infinite and manifestive presence of Brahma and Its ordainment of existence, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3657 :O Rohita, Ruler risen high and potent, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and correction to the Brahmana-violator. 
3658 :That Brahma, the Sun, becomes Varuna, ruddy fire in the evening, it becomes Mitra when rising in the morning, becoming Savita, life giving inspirer, it goes on across the middle space, while becoming Indra, it blazes as heavenly light at noon. To that self-refulgent presence, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3659 :O Rohita, Ruler risen highand brilliant, shale up that person, punish him down to naught, and extend the snares of law, justice and punishment, to the Brahma violator. 
3660 :Over a thousand days of Divinities, each day equal to the four yugas of 4,32000O (four million, three hundred and twenty thousand) years, are spread the wings of the will and action of the cosmic Sun, saviour spirit and redeemer from the oppressions of life, the heavenly Bird which flies over and beyond the borders of time and space on the path of eternal freedom. Having taken over all divine forces of nature and humanity unto its heart, watching over all worlds of existence, it flies on and on. To this over-presiding Power of the universe, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3661 :O Rohita, Ruler risen high over the world, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the snares of law, justice and punishment to the Brahmana- violator. 
3662 :This Brahma, self manifested Supreme Spirit of the universe, is at the heart of waters and all dynamics of nature and humanity. It is the ultimate root cause of thousands of Prakrti’s forms and variations, infinite in power, creative saviour and promoter during evolution and the ultimate devourer that sucks in unto Itself all that is in existence. To this Lord that generated this entire universe, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3663 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the snares of law, justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3664 :Waves of energy at the speed of light irradiate the sun, pure, powerful and divine, shining with splendour in heavn. His radiant rays of light set the heaven ablaze as he shines forth toward the earth below with golden bursts of light showers. To that Divine Sun, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the person who knows Brahma in truth. 
3665 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the snares of law, That Supreme Brahma by whose prime potential the rays of light irradiate the sun over the zodiacs, by whose adorable grace learned sages live and attain to Freedom, the One Light that shines in many forms, to that Lord that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3666 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the snares of law, justice and retribuction to the Brahmana-violator. 
3667 :Seven rays of light are yoked to the one wheel chariot of time drawn by one horse of light of seven names. The wheel, unaging and automotive, has three subwheels with three naves and three rims, three phases of time and seasons, and in this time-space orbit of the sun abide all regions of the world of existence. To that Lord of time and the sun, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3668 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the snares of law, justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3669 :Joined with, pervading in, the eightfold form of the world of Prakrti diversified over Akasha, Vayu, Agni, Apah, Prthivi, mind, intelligence and Ahankara (Gita, 7,4-5) and, through universal mind, extending the Rtam thread of the unity of truth and law through all these eight (Gita, 7,7), the mighty awful burden bearer of the universe, father creator of the divine forms of nature, generator of the intelligence and piety of the wise in humanity, the divine Spirit of the universe rolls through and rules over all the quarters of space across the universe. To that One Lord of time and space and humanity, that person is an offensive sinner who violates a Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3670 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3671 :Holding with the universal mind the one single thread of unity and law of Rtam running through the total diversity of existence over and across all directions of space in the generative womb of Gayatri, the mighty awesome burden bearer of the universe rolls through all regions of the universe. To that wielder of the unity thread of diversity, that person is an offensive sinner who violates the Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3672 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3673 :Three are the kinds of sun-set, three the dawns, three are the regions of firmament, dear friend, three the heavens. O Agni, we know your three kinds of birth, we know three kinds of the birth of divinities. To that Lord whose manifestation all these are, that person is an offensive sinner who violates the Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3674 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3675 :(Three sun-rises and sun-sets have been interpreted by Vishwanatha Vidyalankara as: one on March 21 and September 23, another on June 21, and the third on December 21. With reference to these three, the relative position of the earth with the solar region makes for three heavens or regions of light on earth, the northern, the central and the southern. Three ‘Rajansi’ or regions of the world are the earth, the middle region, and the solar region. Three kinds of the birth of fire are: from fuel on earth, from Vayu (electricity), in the middle regions, and from the sun in the solar region. 
3676 :Three kinds of the birth of divinities are: Birth of the stars from Prakrti’s Virat mutation, birth of the planets from the stars, and birth of satellites such as moon from planets.) He that, self-manifesting and rising, covers the earth with light and vegetation, who places the ocean of vapour in the sky, to that lord self-manifested, that person is an offensive sinner who violates the Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3677 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that sinner, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3678 :O Agni, light of life, by acts, attributes, rays of light and flames of fire, you manifest for the benefit of your creations. Self-lighted and raised, you rise and shine in the heavens. Lighted and raised in yajna, you rise and reach the solar regions. When all the Divinities manifest the presence of Rohita, the Sun on high and everywhere, who would the people, vibrant children of versatile mother earth, worship? Only you, none else. To such lord of light, that person is an offensive sinner who violates the Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3679 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, throw the snares of justice and retribution to the Brahmana-violator. 
3680 :He that is the giver of life to the soul and the power and potential the soul needs on earth, whose glory all people and all worlds in existence worship and all divinities celebrate, who rules the life of all living beings, humans, animals and all others, to that lord of glory, that person is an offensive sinner who violates the Brahmana, the man who knows Brahma in truth. 
3681 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that person, punish him down to naught, extend the arms of law, justice and correction to the Brahmana-violator. 
3682 :The One sole self-existent Brahma exceeds the twofold created world of Purusha and Prakrti more and ever more. In the process of creative evolution, the twofold world of Purusha and Prakrti develops to the threefold world of Purusha, Prakrti and Jiva more and ever more. On the invocation of the human community in unity, close upon the unity, Brahma ordained them to be organised into four classes. To such a lord of light and comprehensive sight, that person is an offensive sinner who violates the Brahmana, the person who knows Brahma in truth. 
3683 :O Rohita, Ruler on high, shake up that Brahmana violator, punish him down to naught, let the snares of law, justice and retribution be spread wide for the Brahmana-violator. 
3684 :(Further on this mantra, refer to Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, 1, 4, 11-15 for the social interpretation.) This mantra can also be interpreted in terms of Patanjal Yoga Sutras: Brahma is Chatushpat (Mandukya Upanishad, 2 and 8-12). In Patanjala Yogasutras, the first five stages of practice are called Bahiranga (External) Yoga, and the last three upto Samadhi are called Antaranga (Internal) Yoga. On completion of the first five, Pankti, on invocation of the Yogi, the Chatushpat Brahma, immanent and transcendent, reveals Itself. Refer Yoga Sutras: 1, 3; 3, 8; 4, 34). 
3685 :Born of the dark night, the ruddy sun has arrived at dawn. The same, blazing with splendour, rises to the heaven, to the heights of heaven. 
3686 :Also: Born of the dark night of Pralaya, the self- refulgent Sun is arisen. He, saviour from darkness, rises to the heavens and, rising and still rising, creating and pervading all creations, transcends beyond the Heavens. 
3687 :This Sukta, as the earlier three, is a song of the Spirit, the One Lord Supreme, Absolute, beyond all doubt: It says: The Lord is One, not two, not three, not four, not five, not six, not seven, not eight, not nine, not even ten. It is One and only One. Names are many: Savita, Mahendra, Dhata, Vidhata, Vidharta, Vayu, Aryama, Varuna, Rudra, Mahadeva, Agni, Surya, Mahayama. The symbol of the Spirit is the Sun. 
3688 :The Sukta has six paryayas which may be called sections or stanzas. In a different order, these sections have been counted as suktas, in which case Kanda 13 would be taken as consisting of nine suktas instead of four. 
3689 :The numbering herein (1-56) is continuous. The number of the mantra in the paryaya is given in brackets at the end of each mantra. 
3690 :There rises Savita, Light of life Supreme, inspiring Sun on Top of heaven (in the Sahasrar Chakra). It comes shining, radiating, revealing, observing, inspiring below (towards the heart core). 
3691 :The sky is full, overflows with light; wrapped radiant with divine light, Mahendra, the great omnipotent, comes (towards the heart core). 
3692 :He is the creator, sustainer, He is the ordainer, Vayu, breath of life, Nabha, omnipresent boundless as space, highest. The sky overflows with light, Mahendra comes wrapped in the halo of light. 
3693 :He is Aryama, guide and path maker, Varuna, lord of judgement and choice, Rudra, just and merciful, Mahadeva, highest refulgent, kind and gracious. The sky overflows with light, Mahendra comes wrapped in the halo of light. 
3694 :He is Agni, fire and passion of life, leader, pioneer, High-priest. He is the Surya, self-refulgent, He is Mahayama, supreme guide and justiciar. The sky overflows with light, Mahendra comes wrapped in the halo of divinity. 
3695 :them, stand about and adore him. The sky overflows with light, Mahendra comes wrapped in the halo of divinity. 
3696 :(Ten darlings: five organs of perception with mana, buddhi, chitta, aharkara and Jivatma, being the chief. In case of the sun, the ten are planets and satellites, abundant earth being the chief. Five pranas and five organs of volition could be taken as the ten darlings.) When the sun rises, shines and radiates its light, the senses and mind, which normally move outwards, come back and turn inward. 
3697 :The sky overflows with light, Mahendra comes wrapped in the halo of divinity. (When the divine light shines in the Sahasrar Chakra, the lower chakras receive and overflow with the light of divinity which flows down to the heart core.) The divine force of vibrant winds, Maruts in the sky and pranas in the human system, moves forward on the swing when the light of the divine Sun radiates to it. 
3698 :(Agni as the light and fire of divinity has three orders: fire on earth, vayu, or wind and electric energy in the sky, and aditya, or sunlight, in the solar region. 
3699 :When the sun shines and light radiates, it first fils the sky and then reaches the earth. This same analogy is here applied to the human psychic system in the process of spiritual realisation in meditation.) The sky, the heart, overflows with the light of divine Savita, Mahendra, Lord Supreme of selfrefulgence, radiates and shines wrapped in light divine. 
3700 :Of that Savita, these nine are the Koshas, sustaining and sustained by Savita, nine ways. 
3701 :(The Koshas sustaining and sustained by Savita are five koshas, i.e., annamaya, pranamaya, manomaya, anandamaya and vijnanamaya, in addition three faculties of perceptive organs, chitta and ahankara and Jivatma. Or, eight chakras described in Atharva-veda, 10, 2, 31 and 11,4, 22, and jivatma itself.) He, Savita, watches everything for the children of divine creation, all that breathe and those that don’t. 
3702 :That Savita is all this concentrated force of existence, and all this concentrated force of matter, energy and thought is contained and sustained in Savita. And That is only One, the One self-existent, self-sustained. 
3703 :All these divine forces of existence are concentred in Him, one with and one into that. 
3704 :Fame, honour and glory, valour and brilliance, inviolable identity, sagely splendour, food and prosperity, and the capacity for good health and preservation of one’s health and well being, all are his. 
3705 :Who knows this Savita as One all-concentred Being, he is the man who knows. 
3706 :Nor fifth, nor sixth, nor even seventh is He ever said to be. He that knows Savita as one is the man that really knows. 
3707 :Nor eighth, nor nineth, nor even tenth is He ever said to be. He that knows Savita as such, as One and only One, really knows. 
3708 :He watches wholly and comprehensively for the sake of all, all that breathe and those that don’t. He that knows Savita as such, as One and only One, really knows. 
3709 :That One Savita is all this concentrated force of existence. All this concentrated force of matter, energy and thought is contained and sustained in Savita. And that Savita is only One, the One self-existent, self- sustained. And he who knows this Savita as One all- concentred Being really knows. 
3710 :All divinities of existence concentre into Him, one with and one into that. He that knows this Savita as One all-concentred Being really knows. 
3711 :Divine knowledge, austere discipline, fame, honour and glory, power, force, sagely splendour, food and prosperity, health and nourishment, Past achievement, present and future possibilities, faith, lustre and pleasure, happiness and Belong to him who knows this refulgent Savita as the One and only One all concentrated Being. 
3712 :He is the Ordainer of annihilation and creation, He is Immortality, He is immense, He is the protector. 
3713 :He is Rudra, dispenser of justice, mercy and punishment, dispenser of worldly wealth and power, saviour from suffering for the humble and obedient on submission in proper manner. 
3714 :All the moving stars and planets obey his law and discipline with praise and adoration. 
3715 :All those stars and constellations including the moon abide under his law and control. 
3716 :He is manifest from the day, since the day is born of him through his manifestation. 
3717 :He is manifest from the night, since the night is born of him through his manifestation. 
3718 :He is manifest from the firmament, since the firmament is born of him through his manifestation. 
3719 :He is manifest from Vayu, sinceVayu is born of him through his manifestation. 
3720 :He is manifest from the solar region, since the solar region is bom of him through his manifestation. 
3721 :the quarters of space are born of him through his manifestation. 
3722 :He is manifest from the earth, since the earth is bom of him through his manifestation. 
3723 :He is manifest from Agni, since the fire is bom of him through his manifestation. 
3724 :And he is manifest from the waters, since the waters are born of him through his manifestation. 
3725 :And he emerges from the Rks, since the Rks are born of him for his self-manifestation. 
3726 :And he is born of yajna, since yajna is born of him since creation. 
3727 :He thunders, he flashes as lightning, and he sends the showers of hail down on earth. 
3728 :And he does this for the sinner, for the virtuous, for man, and for the demon. 
3729 :Whether you raise herbs or send down showers of rain for the good of life or promote humanity... 
3730 :All that is your grandeur and glory, Lord Almighty, a mark of your infinite action and potential Billions are your manifestations, all things controlled within the bounds of your law. 
3731 :Indra is greater than the immortals, Prakrti, particles and Jiva, Indra is greater than all the mortal and mutable forms of Prakrti. 
3732 :Indra, greater than non-liberality and enmity, lord of great powers and actions, you are infinite and supreme master over all. We worship you and pray for being close to you. 
3733 :Salutations to you, Lord all-watching. Pray watch me with a favourable eye, O watchful Lord. 
3734 :Look at me with love and favour, bless me with food and nourishment, honour and fame, lustre and splendour, and the light and brilliance worthy of a Brahmana. 
3735 :Lord immense and infinite, omnipotent, great and glorious, patient yet unchallengeable, we adore and worship you. 
3736 :Fathomless as the ocean, flaming as fire and glorious as dawn, pure and spotless as light, dynamic as energy, patient yet unchallengeable, thus do we worship and adore you. 
3737 :Cosmic umbrella, unbounded Presence, gracious Divinity, shelter home and happiness for all, thus do we worship and adore you. 
3738 :Lord of expansive universe, highest best, omnipresent, gracious, thus do we worship and adore you. 
3739 :Creator of wealth, value and grandeur of wealth, controller and ordainer of wealth, and the winner of stability of wealth, thus do we worship and adore you. 
3740 :Salutations to you, Lord Savita, all watchful, pray keep the gracious eye on me, all-watching divine Presence. 
3741 :Bless me with food, nourishment and good health, honour and fame, lustre and splendour, and the vision and brilliance worthy of a Brahmana dedicated to Brahma. 
3742 :The earth is sustained by Truth, the solar region is sustained by the sun, the sun across the Zodiacs is sustained by Rtam, laws of nature, and Soma, moon, is sustained in heavenly space. 
3743 :By implication: Bhumi, mother Shakti, is sustained in the home by Truth, Dyau, father power, is sustained by vision and intelligence, Aditya Brahmacharis in the commumity are sustained by the discipline of law and austerity, and Soma, the vitality of virility and fertility, is sustained in the heavenly heights of Brahmacharya discipline. 
3744 :By Soma, the Adityas are strong, by Soma, the earth is great, and Soma is safely secured, collected in (Aditya Brahmacharis are strong by vital energy of Soma, Brahmacharinis are strong by the vital energy of virgin fertility, and soma, vital energy is built up and secured by Brahmacharya in the vital organs of the body.) When the Soma grinders grind and crush the soma herbs, then the yajamana feels that having drunk the juice he has drunk the real Soma. But the Soma which the Vedic sages know and drink is different. Earthly people do not and cannot know and drink that spiritual soma of ecstasy. 
3745 :O Soma, vital energy of the body system of youth, when the Brahmacharis drink you up, i.e., assimilate you into the body’s aura, ojas, you rise and grow more and more. Indeed, Vayu, pranic energy of nature, is the preserver and promoter of soma as a month is the constituent part of the year and the year grows by assimilation of months. 
3746 :rdyiWMHI oll^'rl: ttttt Tf§T7T: I u icunP m ucj PriP h ^v h i Ph mfsfcr : II <a II Soma, lustrous vitality of Brahmacharya, is preserved, protected and promoted by means and practices enshrined in Brhat Samans of Veda. O Soma, you stay strong and inviolated when the Brahmachari listens to the veteran wise celibates. No earthly lovers of carnal pleasure can taste the energy and ecstasy of high soma tasted by the dedicated. 
3747 :Note: The verses from the sixth upto sixteenth describe the bridal gifts of the maiden married to a graduate on the completion of the education of both after the discipline of Brahmacharya. 
3748 :When Surya, the maiden bright as dawn, is married and goes to the house of her husband, her mind and awareness of moral and spiritual values is her cover, her eye and vision itself is the collyrium. Her stability on the reality of earth and her faith in God and heaven is her treasure and security. 
3749 :Raibhi verses of divine adoration are her dowry. Vedic verses on human values and social relations are her companion. Truth, beauty and goodness of life for all is the bride’s wear as she goes, adorned and sanctified, to the house of her husband. 
3750 :Stomas, Vedic songs of adoration, are her beauty aids, Vedic hymns, her cushion and crown, Ashvins, knowledge and complementary practice, her choice friends, and Agni, light of life, her pioneer and guide. 
3751 :Soma is the proposer and Ashvins, pranic energies, the first inspiration and attraction, when Savita, giver of life and light, gives away the bride, love lorn at heart, to the bride groom. 
3752 :The mind is her bridal chariot, bright sky its canopy, the sun and moon, the motive powers, when the bride like the glorious dawn goes to the house of her husband. 
3753 :Sun and moon both equal and glorious, yoked and celebrated by Rks and Samans, move the chariot smoothly. Let revelation of the Word and infinite space be the movement towards advancement, and let the path be both tumultuous and restful over the moving and unmoving world unto the light of heaven. 
3754 :Surya, the new bride, rides the chariot of the mind when she moves to the house of her groom (with her dreams of the future). When she moves, her pure ears are the wheels (on which the chariot moves because the mind moves in response to the stimulants of the senses), and the wind, psychic energy of thought, is the axis of her wheels. 
3755 :The bridal procession of Surya proceeds which Savita, her father, starts. The bullocks are made to move in Magha nakshatra and the bride is inducted into the groom’s home in Phalguni nakshatra. 
3756 :O Ashvins, married couple, when you come together by the three wheeled chariot of the mind with Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, mind, motion and matter, constituents of personality in balance, asking for fulfilment of the wedding of Surya, where is one of the wheels of your chariot and where abide the other two for the purpose of benediction? O Ashvins, protectors and promoters of life’s good, noble men and women of reason and passion, when you come to the bride, darling choice of the groom, let all the Vishvedevas, nobilities around and the mind and senses within, know and approve your intent and purpose, and then let Pusha, future progeny for sustenance, select the life-giving parents for the arrival. 
3757 :O Surya, bride of the new home, the sages of knowledge know the two wheels of your life’s chariot according to the seasons, i.e., your words and actions according to your moods and circumstances. The third, thought, reflection and intention, is hidden in the depths of the mind which only exceptional master minds know. And that one is a mystery. 
3758 :We invoke and adore Aryaman, noble friend and brother, who enlightens us on marriage matters and the husband’s role in maintaining the wife and family. 
3759 :I release you, like a ripe fruit, from your parental branch and your bond here but not from there in your new life and family which you now join. 
3760 :I release her, O Indra, virile and youthful groom, from here, not from there where I assign her to be wholly dedicated to her husband’s family so that she may be the proud mother of noble children and the mistress of good fortune and all round prosperity. 
3761 :I release you from the bonds of Varuna, discipline of virginity observed in the spirit of freedom, justice and responsibility in the parental home, where Savita, lord giver of life and natural growth to maturity, had bound you in dedication without inhibition, and I settle and establish you with your husband in a new life of natural conjugal order of truth and piety in the world of noble action where, I wish and pray, you may be happy with your husband and your new friends and companions. 
3762 :Let Bhaga, the noble husband, take your hand and lead you home. Let the Ashvins, father and mother of the husband, take you home by chariot in all comfort and safety with love. Go to your new home and new inmates of the home, be the mistress dedicated to your home, manager and darling love of all, ordering your new homely life, speaking well with love and affection to all. 
3763 :Here in the new home may your new love and joy increase to new heights with family and children. Keep awake and alert in the home for the fulfilment of your family duties and obligations. Here with this husband of yours join in body and mind, and both of you enjoy good fellowship, company and converse till full age and fulfilment of your yajnic home life. 
3764 :Be here, stay together in this home in happy conjugality, never separate, live and enjoy a full life in your own home, playing, celebrating and living with children and grand children a higher and happier home life. 
3765 :These two, husband and wife, like sun and moon, move on in complementary order by their own power and virtue, playing happily like innocent children across the serious depths of Grhastha, duties and responsibilities of family life. Of these, one watches around, enlightens all areas of life around the home, and the other rises again and again ever new in love and beauty like the moon in the bright fortnight, according to the time and season, thereby setting the time and seasons of the family in order. 
3766 :O lady of the house, like the new moon you rise anew brighter every day in love, beauty, conjugal and familial joy, the banner of every new day, pioneer of the dawns every morning. O new moon of the home, you organise and dispense the rightful share of all Devas, divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity, through yajnic hospitality and fulfil the needs and obligations of a long and happy family life. 
3767 :Shed away the sense of sin and shame or impurity of mind, share the wealth, knowledge and joy of life with and from the holy and wise. When the bride has taken the seven steps to matrimony for conjugal life, she joins the husband heart and soul. 
3768 :Then the blood grows dark and red, love and desire vibrates and agitates for fulfilment, the near kinsmen of this bride swell with hope and joy of expectation, and the husband waxes with new responsibilities of conjugal love. 
3769 :The handsome bright body of the husband becomes polluted by that impious act if he covers his body with the wife’s clothes during her period. 
3770 :Hope and expectation on the one hand, and fear and frustration on the other, appreciation and praise on the one hand, and anger and cruelty on the other, cutting and designing on the one hand, and irony that cuts deep to the very core, these are various moods and manners of women. These, Brahma, husband of the woman, wise and visionary, ought to see, and having seen as modes of appearance and reflection, he knows, corrects, purifies or excuses with higher understanding. 
3771 :Matrimony? It cab be roughshod, exasperating, thorny, bitter, all barbs, all poison, it is dangerous to flirt with it. Only the wise youth of divine vision who knows the light and sanctity of Surya, the sunny maiden, deserves the prize he may carry away. 
3772 :Only that wise young man, Brahma, wins a happy blessed home with Surya, a brilliant sunny wife, who understands and internalises the spirit of reparation, reconciliation and atonement in love relationship, and compromise and adjustment in practical conjugal living. Only this way, the woman suffers no loss, no injury, no O Dampati, wedded couple, speaking the truth in honest behaviour, action and dialogue, both of you, bear and enjoy abundant wealth, honour and excellence of knowledge and well being, both earthly and divine. O Brahmanaspati, lord and master of the divine voice, make the husband loving and agreeable to this bride. Let him, loving, admiring and dedicated, speak to her words of love and sweetness, decency and grace. 
3773 :O cows, words of wisdom and rays of light, be here and stay, go not far, you being active, fertile and generous, advance and raise this wedded couple far high in life with pregeny. O Vishvedevas, divinities of the world, noble wedded couples, parents and all other seniors, blest with the splendour of Soma, wish this new couple to be noble, loving and harmonious at heart toward each other. 
3774 :O cows, enter this home with your progeny. O light rays, O generous people of holy words and divine wisdom, enter and bless this wedded couple with your gifts. This couple never faults on their duty of service to the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity. May Pusha, lord of health and nourishment, Maruts, winds and all vibrant brave, Dhata, lord sustainer and ordainer of life, and Savita, creator and inspirer of life’s vision and energy, inspire and advance you for the sake of this wedded couple. 
3775 :May the paths of life be simple, straight, natural and free from thorny obstacles, paths by which our friends go and reach their choice goals of fulfilment. May Dhata, lord sustainer and ordainer of life, inspire and join us with Bhaga, honour, excellence and prosperity, with Aryaman, progress with judgement and rectitude, and with lustre and splendour of the world. 
3776 :The lustre, splendour and inspiration that is collected, concentrated and confirmed in the axis and orbits of the stars and in the inspiration of soma, and the power and purity that is in the light of sun rays and the words of Veda, and the generosity that is in cows, with that power and purity, that light and splendour, and that generosity, may the Ashvins, all wedded couples and senior parents bless this bride. 
3777 :The lustre and splendour with which the udder of the unviolated cow, or the inspiring water, or the axes of honourable actions are infused, with that same lustre and splendour, O Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and humanity, bless and protect this bride. 
3778 :fire and fuel in the waters of life, which the divine sages worship and serve in yajnic projects, may that lord omnipotent, saviour protector of the vitality and virility of life against any possible fall, bless the groom with those honeyed vitalities of virility so that he may grow mighty and lustrous in his married life. 
3779 :Here and now I give up and cast away whatever is injurious, infectious, defiling and overpowering with seizure of limbs and impairment of faculties and take on to whatever is good and exhilarating for the health and lustre of body and mind. (For further reference: Atharva, 16, 1, 1-13.) Let health experts of fertility prepare exhilarating and vitalising waters for the ceremonial bath of this bride, let her circumambulate the holy fire of Aryaman, Spirit of new life, pray for and receive the inspiring gift of new life. O Pushan, lord of nourishment and growth, her father-in-law and husbands are waiting for her arrival as for a new dawn in the home. 
3780 :Let your golden glow of health and the light and lustre of heart and soul be good and auspicious for you. Let the flow of life and conduct be good and auspicious. Let your new position in the home be central, creative and auspicious. Let the wedded association be good, auspicious and peaceful. Let the social flow of life be pure and nobly abundant in a hundred ways. Let your conjugal union with husband in body and mind be good and intimate and mutually inspiring. 
3781 :O Indra, noble and virile groom of a hundredfold power and virtue, in the triple pleasures of body, mind and soul for total living, make the bride, a maiden of boundless virtue exclusively dedicated to you, radiant as sun rays in knowledge, action and piety. 
3782 :O bride, hoping and planning to achieve life’s happiness with good cheer of mind, noble progeny, good fortune and the wealth of life, having joined your husband for a common purpose in common discipline with him, prepare yourself and launch upon the joint mission of earthly joy and immortal freedom of the soul. 
3783 :Just as the abundant sea in space and on earth orders and runs the water systems of the rivers, so, O bride, having joined the husband’s home, manage the affairs of the family as the queen of a new order. 
3784 :Be the queen of love and affection among your in-laws, the father-in-law and his peers, be the queen of love and respect among your husband’s brothers and cousins, be the darling queen of the heart of your sister- in-law, and the ruling love of your mother-in-law. 
3785 :Those noble women who spun the thread, who did the weaving, those who sewed the garment to the ends of completion, may they provide the raiment for you till a happy full age. With this good will and best wishes, please put on this garment. 
3786 :People shed joyous tears of separation when a darling of their life leaves home for another. At the same time they extend life’s yajna by matrimony and plan and accomplish a long programme of disciplined and enlightened conjugality. They perform this act of joy and satisfaction for the parents also and for the husband and wife when they are united as a loving married couple. 
3787 :(This mantra has also been interpreted in a totally different manner by Vishvanatha Vidyalankara: ‘People wail for a life time, desecrate a holy yajna and create a long snare for themselves including a painful experience for the parents when they convert holy matrimony into mere physical union of carnal pleasure for the husband and wife. ’ This interpretation is based on a different interpretation of the nature of tears, the verb ‘vini’, the noun ‘prasiti’, and the words ‘vaman’ and ‘mayah’, and ‘parishvaje’ in the sense of mere physical union.) For the sake of your progeny, I take on this delightful and inviolable adamantine discipline of avowed trust and loyalty of conjugal faith on the lap of divine mother earth. Come and abide here happy, strong and lustrous, and may Savita, lord giver of light and inspiration grant you a long, healthy life. 
3788 :With the same purpose and competence, as Agni, vital heat of cosmic creativity, has taken over the motherly potential of fertile earth, I hold your hand. With me, with plenty, prosperity and progeny, you would not suffer any want or deprivation. 
3789 :sun, may hold your hand, Soma, the loving inspiring man like the gracious moon, may inspire you with love and inspiration and lead you to have noble progeny, and may Agni, creativity of nature and divinity, pervading every where in existence, bless the wife with womanly wealth of fertility and motherhood for a full age till fulfilment. 
3790 :I hold your hand for familial good fortune so that with me, your husband, you may live a full long life as a happy wife. Bhaga, lord of prosperity, Aryama, lord of justice and advancement, Savita, lord creator and light giver, and Purandhi, holder and sustainer, and all divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity have given you to me for living the happy life of a good household.. 
3791 :Bhaga, lord of power and prosperity, has taken your hand, Savita, lord of light and life, has taken your hand (and given it unto me). By Dharma, then, you are my wife, and, by Dharma, I am your husband. 
3792 :This bride now would be my responsibility to maintain. Brhaspati, lord of the grand universe, has given and entrusted you unto me. The high priest, sagely scholar of the Vedas, has confirmed the gift to me, socially. You now live happy with me, your husband, unto a full hundred years enjoying the company of noble children. 
3793 :Tvashta, divine maker, has made the cloth for comfort and good fortune with the blessings of Brhaspati and the good wishes of poets and sages. Thereby may Savita and Bhaga adorn this bride with raiment and bless her with progeny like Surya, child of the sun. 
3794 :fire, heaven and earth, Matarishva, winds and electric energy of the firmament, Mitra and Varuna, sun and moon, day and night, Bhaga, universal prosperity, both Ashvins, complementarities of Nature, Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, Maruts, winds of the firmament, Brahma, lord supreme of the universe, Soma, life-giving energy of the moon, bless and advance this bride with noble progeny. 
3795 :First of all it was Brhaspati, lord of expansive nature, who created the hair on the head of this Surya, maiden child of the sun. After that we, Ashvins, prepare and consecrate this bride for the groom. 
3796 :It is that form, beauty and grace which the maiden wears and bears, that which is the bride sojourning with mind and imagination in search of a mate, I long for in earnest. I with friends and associates, the latest ones too, will live and behave in accord with her. It is the expert artist who beautifully designed and wove the beauteous bouquet of her hair as snares of love and excitement. 
3797 :I have fixed into me the love and beauty of this maiden, knowing and seeing that therein is the seat of my heart and love. I do not take anything by stealth, having tied and now loosened the bonds of Varuna myself. I am mentally free, yet freely bound. 
3798 :O bride, I release you from the bond by which Savita, blissful lord giver of life, bound you in the father’s home. Now for you, bound in union with me, the husband, I create and prepare a free, comfortable and wide path of life. 
3799 :O members of the family, raise and rouse yourselves anew in this new situation, eliminate the negative forces, establish this bride in noble works in her new role. Dhata, lord sustainer and ordainer of life, wise and all knowing, has got the husband for her. Let Bhaga, the husband, brilliant and confident, ruling and organising life, knowing things well, go forward and provide the lead. 
3800 :Bhaga, lord sustainer and ordainer of life, has framed the value orders of life: Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha; four social orders: Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra; four stages of personal life: Brahmacharya, Grhastha, Vanaprastha and Sanyasa. Tvashta, lord maker and organiser of life, has placed the woman as partner of man in matrimony in this order and organisation. May the bride be good and auspicious for us. 
3801 :O bride, ascend the chariot of Grhastha, decked with flowers, versatile in form and role, of golden beauty, well cultured and moving forward in a well controlled manner. O Surya, sunny light of a new dawn for the new home, ascend to the new world of freedom and immortality through Grhastha, and make the life of your husband and family beautiful and comfortable as an earthly paradise. 
3802 :O Varuna, O Brhaspati, O Indra, O Savita, pray lead and bring the bride to our home. O bridegroom, young man of noble qualities as Varuna, educated and enlightened with wide knowledge like Brhaspati, strong and powerful as Indra, and virile and brave as Savita, conduct home this bride who is noble and helpful to brothers and sisters, loving to the husband and hind to the animals of the home. Escort her for us, bring her home. And may God bless her as mother of noble children. 
3803 :O pillars of the home and family, father and mother of the bridegroom, blest by divinities with a noble son, please do not hurt the maiden, the bride, be kind and loving. 
3804 :We open and decorate the auspicious door of the house blest by divinities and make it a beautiful path of entry for the bride’s welcome. 
3805 :Let Veda mantras be chanted and resound in the front, at the back, at the end, in the middle, in fact all round the house. O bride, having reached the holy, auspicious divine home free from obstacles and inhibitions, beautiful and blissful, shine as a queen in the house of the husband. 
3806 :first conducted Surya, the bride, with her bridal wealth to you. May you now give her with her maturity and motherly potential as wife to the bridegroom and his family who will honour, protect and maintain her. (Refer also to Rgveda 10, 85, 40) (When a girl child is born, the parents think of her upbringing, education and preparation for her settlement under the divine care of Agni, divine spirit of life and light. When she is mature with full health, education and bridal accomplishments, she is married and given over to the bridegroom and his family. The word ‘pad’ means husband but it also means one who cares for her and maintains and protects her. And when she comes to the family of the bridegroom she becomes the responsibility of the entire family. Hence ‘patibhyah’ here means the bridegroom and other members of the family who will care, maintain and protect her and help her grow further as mother head of the family.) Agni, lord of light and life, now gives her back to the bridegroom along with her maturity of health and age and womanly potential, her vigour and lustre of youth and brilliance. The husband now will look after, protect and maintain her for a life time of full hundred years. 
3807 :Surya is first the care of Soma. Your second protector, O Surya, is Gandharva. Agni is the third protector, and the fourth protector, your husband, is the son of man. 
3808 :(Reference may be made to Rgveda, 10, 85, 40: “O bright girl, your first protective and promotive gurdian is Soma, divine nature’s energy which leads you to puberty. The next is Gandharva which energises you with fertility. The third is Agni which inspires you to love and passion, and your fourth guardian is your husband, son of man for the continuance of humanity.” Since the fourth is called ‘the son of man’, it is clear that the previous three are other than the man, they being forces of nature as explained. It has to be stressed and clarified that the guardians in successive order have all the qualities of the previous ones. Therefore the fourth, son of man, has all the other three: health, energy, enlightened passion, and all-inclusive humanity. In other words, he has to be cool yet energetic as soma, bright as sun, enlightened as well as enthusiastic as agni, and human as the concept of man in Rgveda, 10, 53, 6. Reference may also be made to Gita 9, 2O and 15, 13; 10, 26; 4, 37; 10, 36; and 10, 28 and 7, 11.) Soma, the state of child-like innocence, gave her unto Gandharva, rising self awareness of identity toward puberty, Gandharva gave her unto Agni, state of adolescence, love and maturtiy, and Agni, on maturity, balanced and tempered identity with education, gives her to me with homely wealth and noble progeny implicit in her. 
3809 :O wedded couple, man and wife, rich in food, energy and settled life, may noble understanding and wisdom come and abide with you. May love, faith and trust, and noble ambitions be and abide in your hearts. May both of you as wedded couple mutually be guardians of each other and upholders of your common ideals and responsibilities as masters of noble living, and may Aryama, lord divine of familial well being, be kind and gracious path maker so that we all may enjoy good homes and happy family life. 
3810 :O bride, happy at heart with a noble auspicious mind, be the mistress of adorable wealth worthy of the brave without any weakness. O wedded couple, worthy guardians of noble values and actions, we wish you a clear path of holy matrimony, a noble destination in life and full satisfaction of your desires and ambitions in life, and we exhort you that you drive out all misunderstanding, suspicion and negative thinking from your life which, otherwise, might stand as a rock in your way and block your passage to advancement. 
3811 :All herbs and trees, all streams and rivers, all fields and forests which are around, may they all, O bride, as protectors and guardians, protect you as the mother of progeny for your husband against all evils and attacks of negativity. 
3812 :We have taken on to this path of matrimony as our way of life. It is holy, clear, and a harbinger of auspicious well being and prosperity. On this path the brave are never defeated, never destroyed, in fact they achieve the same wealth and values as of the other brave Listen, ye men and women, the word of prayer and good wishes by which the wedded couple may attain the best and sweetest pleasure of life: May all devotees of Vedic speech, divine women busy in their daily chores, all sages who live in their forest groves, be good and kind to the bride. May none on way hurt the bride and none obstruct the bridal procession conducting Surya to her new home. 
3813 :All those worthies of society who come in response to the members of the bride’s family and join and grace the beautiful bridal procession, after the wedding yajna, on way to her new home are respectable. Let the noblest respectable people of the bride’s family escort them to their places from where they had come. 
3814 :Let the forces counter to the ways of Grhastha which afflict and mislead the wedded couple never come their way. O wedded couple, cross over the difficult paths and problems of life by simple, straight and clear ways of life, and let enemies, wants and adversities flee away from you. 
3815 :By the Vedic advice of the high priest and the help and cooperation of the members of the home with a friendly eye of love free from power, anger or protest, I make the entire nuptial ceremony, wedding gifts and the bridal chariot, all look beautiful and gracious. Well ordered every way, with all beauties of form and function as it all is by our joint efforts, may Savita, lord of life, make it agreeable and beautiful to the bridegroom and the members of his family. 
3816 :come to this home of her husband and family. Dhata, lord ruler and sustainer of the world, had ordained this house, family and environment for her. May Aryama, lord of order and advancement, Bhaga, lord of glory and prosperity, both Ashvins, nature’s complementarities of growth and progress, and Prajapati, lord of his children of creation, bless and exalt this bride with children and other people of the family around. 
3817 :O man, this woman, the bride, strong in spirit and morals, mature and fertile in health, has come to you as wife in whom you would plant the seed, and, bearing the seed of the virile husband, nourishing the seed and bearing milk from the steams of her body energy, she will give birth to your child for you and your family. 
3818 :O Bride, lady of intelligence, Sarasvati, O lady of grace, Sinivali, noble, brilliant and queen-like you are, settle secure here in the home, let your presence pervade in the home like Vishnu’s in the universe. Give birth to the baby and may the baby be in the good will of Bhaga, lord of life’s excellence and glory. 
3819 :O women, let vibrations of love and peace emanate from you. Take over the reins of the home and give up whatever is undesirable. O man and wife, do nothing evil, avoid sin, be unassailable, and may you never suffer any loss or harm. 
3820 :Of kind eye, unhurtful to the husband, gentle, efficient, gracious, self-regulated for inmates of the home, mother of the brave, loving to brother-in-law, happy at heart you are, may we rise and advance with you. 
3821 :Unhurtful and loving to brothers-in-law, loving to the husband, kind to animals, self-controlled, noble and brilliant, blest with progeny, mother of the brave, and gracious, serve and maintain the holy fire of the home. 
3822 :O adversity, get off from here! What for do you come? I being the stronger, drive you out of my house. O lover of nothing, O indigence, unwelcome visitor, get up and run off, don’t stay here. 
3823 :As this lady of the house has served and maintained the holy fire of home life, so now, O lady, offer homage to Sarasvati and the parents and seniors of the family. 
3824 :woman in the bed. O noble lady, give birth to noble progeny which may enjoy the love and favour of the good will of Bhaga, lord of good fortune, for the home and family. 
3825 :The grass mattress which you spread below and the cover you spread on the mattress, let the girl who marries the husband ascend thereon who expects progeny. 
3826 :Cover the grass mattress with red deer skin and let the woman expecting good progeny sit thereon and serve this holy fire of the home. 
3827 :O wife, rise on this mattress cover, sit thereon, serve this fire, this divine fire destroys all evil elements of life and health. Here give birth to the progeny for the husband, and may this progeny of yours enjoy long and noble healthy life. 
3828 :May the noble progeny born of the womb of this mother, all of good health and vision, of versatile noble form, character and function, live long and abide by her. 
3829 :May the woman of good fortune, noble wife of her husband, sit on the mattress and serve the holy fire, and may she honour the divinities in the home. 
3830 :Noble and auspicious, harbinger of peace and progress to the family, kind and loving to the husband, gracious to the father-in-law, pleasant and agreeable to the mother-in-law, please enter this home and join the family. 
3831 :Be gentle to the father-in-law and other seniors, be loving to the husband and agreeable to the members of the family, be good and pleasant to all these people of the family, be good for the health and growth of all this family and all these people. 
3832 :Come you all and meet this bride, she is so good and auspicious harbinger of good fortune. Wish her all well with good fortune and protect her against all adversity and misfortune, then you may leave. 
3833 :All those who are young, all those who are elderly, even those who are distraught at heart, pray wish her that she may shine with lustre, and having blessed her, pray you may leave. 
3834 :Let Surya Savitri, maidenly child of the sun, rise and ascend the chariot covered in golden light, wearing all forms of beauty for the attainment of abundant prosperity and high felicity of married life. 
3835 :Come happy at heart, ascend this bridal bed and here in this home give birth to noble progeny for this young man, your husband. Like the wife of divine Indra, intelligent, rising in awareness and wisdom, leading light of the dawn, be wide awake and ever alert in your life and conduct of duty. 
3836 :Noble and divine people earlier have married their wives, they have lived together united in body with body and mind with mind. You, too, O maiden, like the light of the sun, mistress of universal beauty in form, join me as one with me with your mental greatness and be the proud mother of noble progeny. 
3837 :Rise, O bridegroom, possessed of all manly wealth, we adore you with all esteem and salutations, pray take this maiden, educated and refined in the parental home. Know her as by birth ordained for you as partner of your life and take and love her as your wife. 
3838 :Between the earth, seat of havi and yajna, and the sun, Apsaras, streams of vapour and currents of energy, celebrate the joy of their being in a common home. O man, they are the consorts of the universal creative potential. Similarly women of the home enjoy life in their conjugal home. They are the consorts of man’s creative potential. O man, go to the woman for she is the mother of generation. O Gandharva, O man, go to your partner consort. I offer you homage according to the creative generative season. 
3839 :Homage to Gandharva’s adoration, i.e., to man’s adoration of his consort, we do homage to his loving eye and passion of love. O man of manly wealth of the world, we do you homage with Vedic chant, go and meet your Apsara partner, lovely nymph of your heart’s desire. 
3840 :Let us be happy at heart with wealth, honour and excellence. Rising from here, let us raise Gandharva, the married youth, with his partner, higher. May that noble youth reach the highest status in life. Let us too rise to the heights where noblest people enjoy the best of their life. 
3841 :O man and wife, father and mother to be, meet together at the proper time for procreation, and by the union of the seed and the egg, be father and mother of the progeny. O man, meet the woman, overwhelm her like a youthful lover with passion and communion, and thus alone both of you would beget the progeny and augment your wealth and prosperity here. 
3842 :(The laws of nature are sacred and inviolable, and the operation and observance of those laws at the human level is a serious affair as a matter of duty and self-fulfilment within the laws and dictates of Dharma. The fulfilment of this duty is both joy and self-realisation in life in the state of matrimony at proper time of age and season. The state of health, the state of mind, and the state of the home and family, every thing is important: Sex, marriage, procreation, raising of children and management of the home and family as an institution, all is sacred and serious, and the sanctity of this all must not be desecrated as mere fun and sensual pleasure. This is the comprehensive Vedic view of the united life of man and woman.) O youthful, protective man, love, court, solicit and inspire her, the wife in your care, who is the most blessed and blissful partner of your life, for, into her, men sow the seed of their life’s extension. It is she who in the state of love would bare and wax herself in whom men in a state of passion would plant the seed for generation. 
3843 :Overwhel her with love, caress her softly, embrace the wife happy at heart, and exciting her too at heart, rejoice both here in the home, obtain the child, and may Savita, lord of life, energy and inspiration grant you both a long happy life. 
3844 :A vamprajdm janayatu prajdpatirahordtrdbhydm samanaktvaryama. Adurmahgali patilokamd visemarh sam no bhava dvipade sam catuspade. 
3845 :May Prajapati generate progeny for you both. May Aryama grant you happy days and nights. O woman, free from inauspiciousness, enter this life and home with the husband. Let there be peace and joy for humans and animals all. 
3846 :The father who gives the bridal garments to the bride and wedding garments to the sagely and enlightened bridegroom provided by devas, noble people, along with Manu, thinking people of the community, protects the bridal bed against all evil and negativities. 
3847 :Whatever wedding gift, i.e., the rightful share of the enlightened bridegroom marrying by choice, e.g., wedding garments for the bridegroom, wedding garments for the bride, and conjugal rights for both, that has been given to me, the bridegroom, O Brhaspati, master of knowledge and Dharma, and O Indra, lord of power and law, both of you having approved it in favour of the bridegroom, pray now confirm that it has been given to me by the ruler and the high priest of law under the seal of power. 
3848 :Awake, arising and emerging over beautiful quarters, happy, laughing, celebrating your joy of the heart with pleasure and festivity, moving around at leisure, having noble children, a good home, live well enthusiastically, across the bright golden dawns and days of your life. 
3849 :Living life ever anew, fragrant, wearing smart clothes, bubbling with pranic energy, I rise by the bright dawns and, like a bird emerging from the egg, I break through all limitations and rise over sins and evils of life. 
3850 :May the heaven and earth, both bright and beautiful, kind and closest at heart, relentlessly great observers of the divine laws of nature, and the seven streams of life that flow through senses, mind and pranas and through all our actions, keep us away and save us from sin and suffering. 
3851 :I do homage to Surya, dawn of the light of Divinity, to Mitra and Varuna, cosmic spirit of love and justice, to all the divinities of nature and humanity, and, to all those who know the science of material world, I do this homage. 
3852 :I do homage to that immanent Lord of unbounded natural health and assertive life energy who, without piercing and ligatures, provides for the serial structure of separate vertebrae and collar bones and then, later, heals and sets the same back into healthy order if they get dislocated or fractured. 
3853 :Whatever is dark in us, let it be off from us, let the light come at dawn. Whatever is vitiated, blue, pale or ruddy, whatever is burning, whatever wearisome or exhausting, I assign to the central stability of health and regeneration. 
3854 :All those many performances essential to moral and spiritual discipline, all those bonds and limitations essential to the rule and law of Varuna, lord of universal justice, all those positive and negative flows of material well being, all these I surrender unto the central stability of the Lord eternal and immovable. 
3855 :My body which is dearest and most delicate feels uncomfortable, even hurt, by the rough cloth, therefore, first, O Vanaspati, master of the field and forest, first arrange to refine the base of the cloth, cotton, so that we may not feel hurt or uncomfortable. 
3856 :All the ends, the hems and comers, the warp and woof of the cloth woven by the women of the home should be beautiful and soft in feel and comfortable in touch for the body. 
3857 :Inspired with the passion of love for matrimony, let these maidens give up the one, parental, initiation while departing from the parental home, and take on the new matrimonial initiation in truth of thought, word and deed. 
3858 :All nobilities of the world accept and confirm the new matrimonial initiation given by the divine high priest, Brhaspati. We vest this initiated maiden with that light and lustre which is in the sun rays and that fecundity and generosity which is in the cows. 
3859 :Nobilities of the world take on the new matrimonial initiation given by the divine high priest, Brhaspati. We vest this initiated bride with that vigour and brilliance which is vested in the cows and in sun rays. 
3860 :Nobilities of the world take on the new matrimonial initiation given by the divine high priest, Brhaspati. We vest this initiated bride with the glory and good fortune which is vested in the cows and the rays of the moon. 
3861 :Nobilities of the world take on the new matrimonial initiation given by the divine high priest, Brhaspati. We vest this initiated bride with the honour which is vested in the cows and sun rays. 
3862 :Nobilities of the world take on the new matrimonial initiation given by the divine high priest, Brhaspati. We vest this initiated bride with the milk which is vested in the cows. 
3863 :Nobilities of the world take on the new matrimonial initiation given by the divine high priest, Brhaspati. We vest this initiated bride with the love and sweetness which is vested in the cows. 
3864 :If these people with dishevelled hair assemble in your house, enacting a dance of death and wail with sin and sorrow, then may Agni and Savita, brilliant and creative powers and people, save and release you from that deathly sin. 
3865 :If this daughter of yours, crying and wailing with dishevelled hair in your house, enact a scene of sin and sorrow, then may Agni and Savita save you and release you from that deathly sin. 
3866 :If your sisters, other relatives and young women with dishevelled hair assemble in your house enacting a dance of death and wail with sin and sorrow, then may Agni and Savita save you and release you from that deathly sin. 
3867 :If among your people and animals, or in homes and families, sin and evil committed by unrighteous and criminal elements stay on and persist, then may Agni and Savita save you and release you from that sin and unrighteousness. 
3868 :This bride, offering oblations of roasted rice with holiness and laying foundations of familial life with heart and soul, says: May my husband live a full happy long life of hundred years. 
3869 :O lord omnipotent, ruler of the world, Indra, pray bless and inspire this wedded couple loving each other like chakravaka birds: May this couple live and attain a full, long, happy, perfect life with noble progeny in a prosperous home. 
3870 :Whatever wrong was done on the chair, on the cushion or on the wrapping cover or ceremonial wear, and whatever was wrongly done during fast time, and whatever evil was committed during the wedding ceremony, all that we wash away in the cleansing ceremony and keep the evil down. 
3871 :Whatever evil, whatever polluted deed, was done during the wedding or on the bridal car or in the procession, that wrong deed we assign to mutual discussion and discretion of the wise and wash off thus as in cleansing water away. 
3872 :Having assigned the pollution and undesirables to mutual discussion and discretion of the wise, and having thus washed it off as in water, we have become pure and worthy venerable performers of yajna, and we pray may this purity bring us a long happy life across all difficulties. 
3873 :Let this hundred-toothed comb made by the artist scrape and remove the dirt of the head and hair of this bride and this people of the bride’s and bridegroom’s families. 
3874 :We remove all cancerous and consumptive diseases from every part of this bride’s body system. Let disease never affect the earth, never affect the divinities of nature and the nobilities of humanity, never the sun light and never the heavens, never the vast skies, never the waters. O Agni, let not this dirt and infection affect the air, nor all the nourishing powers and parental seniors. 
3875 :Note: According to Shatapatha Brahmana, words such as: apah, divam, antariksham, yamam, at the human life level mean: blood flow, head and brain, the middle region of the body, the wedded couple. So the prayer in this mantra means that the dirt and infection should not affect the regions of nature only, it should also not affect any part of the body of the bride and of the couple and their homely atmosphere. 
3876 :O bride, O bridegroom, O couple, I join you, strengthen you, and guard you with the armour of the earth’s milk of nourishment, I join, strengthen and guard you with the milk and nourishment of the herbs, I join, strengthen and bless you with the joy of progeny and prosperity of wealth. 
3877 :O bride, thus joined, strengthened and armoured, obtain and enjoy this strength, prosperity and life’s I am He, a human version of Purusha, you are She, a human version of Prakrti. I am Sama, you are Rk. I am the heaven, you are the earth. Let us two join and be one. Let us create progeny. 
3878 :The unmarried love to marry and have a life- partner, as we. The generous want progeny. Let us both, unhurt at heart, in soul and pranic energy, be together and work for the achievement of happiness, wealth and the ultimate victory of life. 
3879 :All parents and seniors who have come to this wedding ceremony and to see this bride, may all of them offer this bride along with her bridegroom their blessings This girl, earlier observing the discipline of maidenly zone, has come to this home as a bride. May the parents and seniors, having given her blessings for noble progeny and the wealth of a happy home, guide her now on the path of matrimony yet unknown. She is now a human version of Virat Prakrti, the Mother. May she win noble progeny and much more. 
3880 :O bride, be wide awake anew, all aware and highly awakening yourself and others for a long married life of a hundred years. Enter the home and meet and know the inmates of the home so that you may be the maker and mistress of the home. And may Savita, lord inspirer of light and life, grant you a long, healthy and happy life. 
3881 :Vratya, eternal benefactor and inspirer of humanity ever awake was and is there. Self-manifested, he stirred himself as Prajapati, as creator and sustainer of the children of his creation. 
3882 :Having stirred himself into the creative state as Prajapati, he manifested his golden consort, his own self inspired Shakti, Prakrti. Thus started the evolution of existence. 
3883 :That manifest Vratya thus became One, the one defined as creator through the medium of Prakrti. That One became the Beautiful, the loved one. That became Mahat, creative Prakrti inspired with divine self- awareness, the first and highest form of self-creative evolution, that became Brahma, the Brhat, expansive universe, that became Tapas, that became Satyam, the real world, thereby he became self-manifestive creator Prajapati. 
3884 :That grew, evolved and expanded, that became Mahan, that became Mahadeva, the Supreme Creator. 
3885 :He became the ruling power of divine forces, the Supreme Ruler. 
3886 :He became the Ekavratya, the sole One creative benefactor of all. He took up the Bow, something that causes the flow and expansion further. He holds the Rainbow, spectrum variety of the one Light. 
3887 :With the blue he envelops, deals with, the internal rivalries, and with the red he fixes the outer, external, jealousies. They who know the reality of nature and society say so. 
3888 :(It has been suggested that the role of blue and red rays of the sun in natural and social dynamics needs to be studied and investigated.) (Vedic concept of the creator is not the concept of an external creator. Vedic creator is immanent. And movement too is not physical movement. The movement of the Vedic creator is in thought and will, and since the creator is immanent in Prakrti, therefore the movement of thought and will and the movement and development in natural evolution is simultaneous. Cosmic developments follow divine thought simultaneously.) For Brhat, Rathantara, Adityas and all divinities, that person writes himself off who reviles Vratya and the learned who know this. 
3889 :Of Brhat, Rathantara, Adityas and all Vishvedevas, he becomes the favourite centre of love, and in his eastern quarter upfront: Shraddha, faith and trust, becomes his favourite love, Sama sweetness and joy, his friend, knowledge, his shawl, day, his turban, night, his hair, sun and moon rays, his ear pendants, the stars, his jewels... 
3890 :Cosmic wind and pranic energy, his chariot horses, air, his charioteer, breath, his goad, Honour and fame his fore-running pilots. Honour and fame indeed receive and welcome him who knows this for truth and follows Vratya, lord creator and benefactor of his children. 
3891 :For the gifts of yajnayajniya, Vamadevya, yajna, yajamana and the animals and all watchfuls, that person writes himself off who reviles Vratya and the learned who know this. 
3892 :Of yajnayajniya, Vamadevya, yajna, yajamana, the watchfuls, and the animals, he becomes the favourite centre of love, and in his southern quarter upfront: The dawn becomes his favourite friend and love, mantra, his admirer, knowledge, his shawl, day, his turban, night, his hair, sun and moon rays, his ear pendants, splendour, his jewel. 
3893 :Amavasya, the dark night, and Paurnamasi, the full moon night, his guards, the mind, his chariot, cosmic wind and pranic energy, his chariot horses, air, his charioteer, the whirlwind, the goad, honour and fame, the fore-running pilots. Honour and fame indeed receive and welcome him who knows this for truth and follows Vratya, lord creator and benefactor of his children. 
3894 :Vairupa Sama and Vairaja Sama, Vedic knowledge of variety of diversity and knowledge of one comprehensive refulgence followed him. Also, apah, waters, and ruling Varuna, the ruling spirit of cosmic waters, followed him. 
3895 :The person who reviles Vratya and the scholar of Vratya knowledge alienates himself so far as benefits of Vairupa, Vairaja, waters and Varuna are concerned. 
3896 :Of Vairupa and Vairaja, of waters and Varuna Ruler, he becomes the favourite centre of love, and in his western quarter upfront: his admirer, knowledge, his shawl, the day, his turban, the night, his hair, the sun and moon rays, his ear rings, brilliance, his jewel. 
3897 :Day and night, his guards, mind, his chariot, cosmic energy and pranic energy, his chariot horses, wind his charioteer, whirlwind, his goad, honour and fame, his fore-running pilots. Honour and fame indeed receive and welcome him who knows and follows Vratya in truth, the lord who creates and cares for his children. 
3898 :Him followed Shyaitam Sama and Naudhasam Sama, the Vedic knowledge that speaks of the right path to the ultimate joy of freedom. The Seven Sages and Ruling Soma too followed him. 
3899 :So far as benefits of Shaitya, Naudhasa, Seven Sages and Ruling Soma are concerned, that man uproots and alienates himself who reviles Vratya and the person who knows Vratya. 
3900 :On the other hand, that person who knows and follows Vratya becomes the favourite centre of the love of Shaitya, Naudhasa, Seven Sages and the Ruling Soma, and in his northern quarter upfront: Vidyut, electric energy, becomes his favourite love, thunder and lightning his admirer, knowledge, his shawl, the day, his turban, the night, his hair, sun and moon rays, his ear rings, and flower buds, his jewels. 
3901 :Cosmic energy and pranic energy, his chariot horses, the wind, his charioteer, the whirlwind, his goad, Honour and fame, his fore-running pilots. Indeed, honour and fame receive and welcome him who knows Vratya in truth, the lord who creates and cares for his children. 
3902 :That Vratya rose up and stayed up there for a year. The Devas said to him: Why and for what do you stay up? (The metaphoric description of the creator and creation continues. ‘Year’ can be interpreted, as the ‘day’ in another context, as the age of the created world in one cycle.) He said to the Devas: Bring me a seat. tefct ttW^eft ii 3 II (The idea is that the formative powers of evolution develop and form the world of time, space, and knowledge of the Cosmic awareness of the Creator. The Creator being immanent, the created evolved world itself becomes the seat of the immanent.) Of the seat, summer and spring were two legs. Autumn and rains were the other two. 
3903 :Brhat Samans and Rathantara Samans were two length-wise supports. Yajnayajniya and Vamadevya the cross-wise supports. 
3904 :Sama peace was the comfort-seat, the chant of Om, the back rest. 
3905 :The Devas were his attendants, his thoughts, vibrant messengers, all forms and materials were his All forms and materials become his friends and assistants, at his beck and call, whoever knows this, this way. 
3906 :The Devas made the two spring months his security guards, and Brhat and Rathantara Samans, his assistants to carry out his will and command. 
3907 :The two spring months, from the eastern quarter protect him, and Brhat and Rathantara Samans fulfil his wish and will, whoever knows this. 
3908 :The Devas made the two summer months his security guards, and Yajnayajniyam and Vamadevyam, his assistants to carry out his will and command. 
3909 :The two summer months, from the southern quarter, protect him, and Yajnayajniyam and Vamadevyam fulfil his wish and will, whoever knows this. 
3910 :The Devas made the two rainy months his security guards, and Vairupa and Vairaja, his assistants to carry out his will and command. 
3911 :The two rainy months, from the western quarter, protect him, and Vairupa and Vairaja fulfil his wish and will, whoever knows this. 
3912 :The Devas made the two autumn months his security guards, and Shaitam and Naudhasam, his assistants to carry out his will and command. 
3913 :quarter, protect him, and Shaitam and Naudhasam fulfil his wish and will, whoecer knows this. 
3914 :The Devas made the two winter months his security guards, and the earth and fire his assistants to carry out his will and command. 
3915 :The two winter months, from the lower direction, protect him, and the earth and fire fulfil his wish and will, whoever knows this. 
3916 :The Devas made the two freezing cold months his security guards, and the heaven and the sun, his agents to carry out his wish and command. 
3917 :The two freezing cold months, from the upper direction, protect him, and the heaven and the sun fulfil his wish and will, whoever knows this. 
3918 :For that Vratya, lover and benefactor of humanity, the Devas, from the intermediate direction of the eastern quarter, made Bhava, creative and regenerative spirit of nature’s causation, wielder of the bow and arrow against pure negativity, the agent of his will and command. 
3919 :Bhava, the archer, from the intermediate direction of the eastern quarter, abides as the agent of this Vratya. Neither Bhava, nor Sharva, the force of nature’s catalysis, nor Ishana, nature’s spirit of supreme law, negates this Vratya. 
3920 :Nor does Bhava, nor Sharva, nor Ishana, injure, much less destroy, the person, fellow equals, or wealth or cattle of the man who knows this. 
3921 :For that Vratya, from the intermediate direction of the southern quarter, the Devas made Sharva, force of nature’s catalysis, wielder of the bow and arrow of nature’s causation, the agent of his will and command. 
3922 :Sharva, the archer, from the intermediate direction of the southern quarter, abides as the agent of this Vratya. Neither Bhava, nor Sharva, nor Ishana negates this Vratya. Nor does anyone injure, much less destroy, the person, fellow equals, or wealth, or cattle of the man who knows this. 
3923 :For that Vratya, from the intermediate direction of the western quarter, the Devas made Pashupati, protector of the living, wielder of the bow and arrow, the agent of his will and command. 
3924 :Pashupati, the archer, from the intermediate direction of the western quarter, abides as the agent of this Vratya. Neither Bhava, nor Sharva, nor Ishana negates this Vratya. Nor does any one injure, much less destroy, the person, fellow equals, or wealth or cattle of the man who knows this. 
3925 :For that Vratya, from the intermediate direction of the northern quarter, the Devas made Ugra, nature’s passion of rectitude, wielder of the bow and arrow, the agent of his will and command. 
3926 :Ugra, the archer, from the intermediate direction of the northern quarter, abides as the agent of this Vratya. Neither Bhava, nor Sharva, nor Ishana negates this Vratya. Nor does any one injure, much less destroy, the person, fellow equals, wealth or cattle of the man who knows this. 
3927 :For that Vratya, from the intermediate space of the lower direction, the Devas made Rudra, cosmic spirit of dispensation, wielder of the bow and arrow, the agent of his will and command. 
3928 :Rudra, the archer, from the intermediate space of the lower direction, abides as the agent of this Vratya. Neither Bhava, nor Sharva, nor Ishana negates this Vratya. Nor does anyone injure, much less destroy, the person, fellow equals, wealth or cattle of the man who knows this. 
3929 :For that Vratya, from the intermediate space of the upper direction, the Devas made Mahadeva, supreme among the Devas, wielder of the bow and arrow, the agent of his will and command. 
3930 :Mahadeva, the archer, from the intermediate space of the upper direction, abides as the agent of this Vratya. Neither Bhava, nor Sharva, nor Ishana negates this Vratya. Nor does any one injure, much less destroy, the person, fellow equals, wealth or cattle of the man who knows this. 
3931 :For that Vratya, from the interspaces of all the directions, the Devas made Ishana, Ruler Supreme, wielder of the bow and arrow, the agent of his will and command. 
3932 :Ishana, the archer, from the interspaces of all the directions, abides as the agent of this Vratya. Neither Bhava, nor Sharva, nor Ishana negates this Vratya. 
3933 :Nor does any one injure, much less destroy, the person, fellow equals, wealth or cattle of the man who knows this. 
3934 :'qh'iM % tit i WEfnfsfbrt dHEMHl'ni ctft t-Mcdui ^t^TSff^rf^Tsjrtf n 3 n He who knows this becomes the favourite love of the earth, agni, herbs, trees, all herbals and creepers. 
3935 :Him followed Rtam, dynamics of nature and all life, Satyam, constant reality of existence, the sun, the moon, and all the constellations of stars. 
3936 :One who knows this becomes the favourite love of Rtam, Satyam, sun, moon and the constellations of stars. (The stars and the Law of Constancy and Mutability becomes his passion.) Him followed the Rks, Samans, Yajus, and the verses of Atharva-veda. 
3937 :One who knows this becomes the favourite love of Rks, Samans, Yajus and Atharva-veda, deeply He moved into the direction of the expansive, the boundless. 
3938 :Him followed History, Purana, ancient stories of knowledge and action, Gathas, poems of celebration, and Narashansis, celebrations of heroes and divinities. 
3939 :One who knows this becomes the favourite love of Histories, Puranas, Gathas and Narashansis, deeply absorbed in these studies. 
3940 :One who knows this becomes the favourite love of Ahavaniya fire, Garhapatya fire, Dakshina fire, yajna, yajamana, wealth and cattle. 
3941 :He moved into the unindicated direction (of the unknown, expansive future possibilities). 
3942 :Him followed the seasons, seasonals, world- regions and those of the world regions, months, half months, and the day-night cycles. 
3943 :One who knows this becomes the favourite love of the seasons and seasonals, world regions and those of the world regions, months and half moths, and the day night cycles. 
3944 :He moved into the direction of No-return. He knew there would be no return from there. (See Chhandogya Upanishad 8, 15, 1, and Vedanta 4, 4, 22.) Him followed Diti, the mutability and evolution of Prakrti, Aditi, the constancy of Prakrti, Ida, eternal Speech, Indrani, divine Energy. 
3945 :One who knows this becomes the favourite love of Diti, Aditi, Ida and Indrani. 
3946 :He moved into overall space, all directions. Him followed Virat, the refulgent spirit of the universe, Devas, all divinities, and Devatas, the powers and potentials of the Devas. 
3947 :He who knows this becomes the favourite love of Virat, all Devas and all their powers and potentials. 
3948 :He moved into all the internalities of all directions and space. 
3949 :Him followed Prajapati, sustainer of the people, Parameshthi, supreme power of universal sustenance, Pita and Pitamahas, generators and grand generators of One who knows this becomes the favourite love of Prajapati, Parameshthi, generators and grand generators of life. 
3950 :He became greatness at the fastest, went to the end of the earth and cosmos, and became the vast ocean of Infinity. 
3951 :And him followed Prajapati, Parmeshthi, progenitor, grand progenitor, all activity and faith, having taken the form of generous shower. 
3952 :Activity and action, faith and love, and showers of generosity reach and bless him that knows this. 
3953 :Faith, yajna, progeny and people around, food and delicacies, being enjoyable, come to him. 
3954 :To the person who knows this, faith comes, yajna comes, progeny and people come, food comes, delicacies of life come, freely. 
3955 :He felt impassioned with love and care, and thence arose Raj any a, ruler, protector and the social He rose to control, organise and socially rule the people, his own fraternity, and to provide them with food and delicacies of life with good health. 
3956 :One who knows this becomes the centre of the love and reverence of the people, his own fraternity, with the treasure hold of food and life’s delicacies. 
3957 :With him, his thought and movement, rose Sabha, Samiti and the army, and a commonwealth of joy and prosperity. 
3958 :The ruler who knows this partnership of the ruler and the people becomes the favourite of the love and reverence of the Sabha, Samiti, army and the commonalty of social prosperity. 
3959 :Then if to the house of the ruler, in this social and cultural context, a Vratya, a learned visitor of controlled habits and committed socio-divine values, comes. 
3960 :And the ruler entertains him, treating him as better than even his own self, then the ruler does not revile, and does not from himself, alienate the Raja- Dharma and the Rashtra, the common wealth of social order. 
3961 :From this harmony, the spirit of Brahma, divine learning, and Kshatra, the spirit of social order, would rise stronger and say: where shall we enter and abide? Hence let Brahma, divine vision and knowledge of Veda, enter and abide in Brhaspati, Scholar Bramana, and let Kshatra, knowledge of order and the power and policy of rule, enter and abide with Indra, the ruler. 
3962 :Then Brahma entered Brhaspati, and Kshatra entered Indra, the ruling power. (The kshatriya finds fulfilment in the glory of the social order, and the Brahmana, in the vision of Divine Knowledge.) Hence this earth is Brhaspati and Brhaspati is earth, stability, and the heaven of light is Indra and Indra is heaven and brilliance, the glory. 
3963 :Or, this Agni, the light of knowledge and warmth of love, is Brahma, and that Aditya, the sun of glory, is Kshatra, the social order of power, splendour and enlightenment. 
3964 :To that person comes Brahma and he becomes bright with the light of Brahma.... 
3965 :Who knows that the earth is Brhaspati and Agni is Brahma, (that is, the social order is an integration of knowledge and power, stability and enlightened movement forward like the radiation of light). 
3966 :Glory comes to him, and he commands power and splendour... 
3967 :Who knows that Aditya, the sun, is the social order, and heaven, enlightenment, is Indra, the ruler. 
3968 :If such a learned Vratya atithi, pious and divinely committed visitor, were to come to the house of a grhasthi, a family man ... 
3969 :The host should arise and welcome the guest saying: O Vratya, venerable guest, where were you last, where are you coming from? O Vratya, here is water for you. O Vratya, pray please yourself and do us the favour of sharing your knowledge and wisdom. Vratya, whatever you like we shall offer. Vratya, as you wish, so shall be done. Whatever you need and desire, will be provided. 
3970 :When the host asks the Vratya guest: ‘Where have you been and from where are you coming’? he is only treasuring for himself the knowledge of the ways of the noble and learned men of divinity. 
3971 :When the host says: ‘Sir, please to have water’, thereby he secures water for himself. 
3972 :When the host says: ‘O Vratya, pray satisfy yourself and oblige us’, he only augments the showers of life energy for himself. 
3973 :When he says: ‘O Vratya, whatever you love to have, we shall offer’, he only secures for himself and his family whatever they love to have in life. 
3974 :Whatever the host loves comes to him, he becomes the beloved centre of whatever he loves, if he knows this and acts thus. 
3975 :When he says: ‘Vratya, whatever your desire, that will be provided’, he only secures the fulfilment of his own desires in life. 
3976 :Whoever knows this, fulfilment of desire itself comes to him. Indeed, he becomes the master controller of his own desires and ambitions which, otherwise, would overpower and control him. 
3977 :When he says: ‘Vratya, whatever your choice, the same would be provided’, thereby he only secures the fulfilment of his own choices in life. 
3978 :Whoever knows this, the fulfilment of choice itself comes to him. In the matter of fulfilment of choice, he becomes his own master. 
3979 :If a learned Vratya comes to one’s house at the time of daily yajna when the fire has been taken from the Garhapatyagni, household fire, and it has been placed in the vedi... 
3980 :The house holder should himself arise, greet the guest a: P say : Please forgive me and permit me, let me perform the yajna. 
3981 :If the venerable guest permits, the house holder should perform the yajna. If the guest does not permit, he should withhold the yajna. 
3982 :He that performs the yajna thus permitted by the learned Vratya guest ... 
3983 :He knows the path of the yajnic forefathers, he knows the path of the Devas by which men rise. 
3984 :He does not alienate himself among the Devas, his yajna is fulfilled. 
3985 :He that performs yajna thus permitted by the learned Vratya guest, his house and grhasthashrama, home life, in this world abides well-established and fulfilled. 
3986 :And he that performs yajna but not thus permitted by the learned Vratya... 
3987 :He knows neither the Pitryana, path of the forefathers, nor the Devayana, path of the Devas. (He violates both.) He alienates himself among the Devas, and his yajna remains unfulfilled. 
3988 :And in this world, neither his home nor his grhasthashrama, home life, stays well established and fulfilled who performs yajna but not thus permitted by the learned Vratya guest. 
3989 :In whose house a learned Vratya guest stays for a night ... 
3990 :He thereby secures for himself all those beautiful holy worlds which are on the earth. 
3991 :In whose house a learned Vratya guest thus stays for two nights ... 
3992 :He thereby secures for himself all those beautiful holy worlds which are in the middle regions between earth and heaven. 
3993 :In whose house a learned Vratya guest thus stays for the third night ... 
3994 :Thereby he secures for himself all those beautiful holy worlds which are in the heaven of light. 
3995 :In whose house a learned Vratya guest thus stays for the fourth night ... 
3996 :Thereby he secures for himself all the beautiful holy worlds of the holiest in existence. 
3997 :In whose house the learned Vratya guest thus stays for unlimited nights ... 
3998 :Thereby he secures for himself unlimited beautiful holy worlds in existence. 
3999 :Should an Avratya, i.e., a guest without discipline and dedication, Vratya in name only and yet calling himself a Vratya, come to a householder... 
4000 :Should the householder put him off, or should he not put him off? (The host should not put him off because how is he sure that the visitor is a fraud? So even if the host is in doubt, he should not put him off, because the Atithi is a ‘deva’ any way. He should, rather take him only as an ‘atithi’ and say): For this holy presence of a human guest, I offer water, to this holy presence I offer shelter, to this holy figure I offer food. Thus should he get him served as a guest. 
4001 :To that pious entity the service is offered, and one who knows this has his service accepted thus to the divinity. 
4002 :When Vratya moved into the eastern direction, he became the strength of the storm and thus moved. He made the mind as the consumer of food for strength. 
4003 :The man that knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, the mind as the consumer of food, (and thus he gains the strength of mind in consequence). 
4004 :When he moved into the southern direction, he became Indra, lord omnipotent, and thus moved. He made strength as the consumer of food. 
4005 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, strength as the consumer of food (and thus he gains strength in consequence). 
4006 :When he moved into the western direction, he became Ruler Varuna of waters, dynamic action, and thus moved. He made waters as the consumer of food (and thus he gains the dynamism of action). 
4007 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, the waters as the consumer of food for strength and smartness. 
4008 :When he moved into the northern direction, he became Ruler Soma of the strength of peace, and thus moved. He made the oblation offered by seven sages as the consumer of food (and thus he gains the strength and peace of mind and senses). 
4009 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, oblations as the receivers and consumers and also givers of food and strength. 
4010 :When he moved into the lower and fixed direction, he became Vishnu, the sun, and thus moved. He made Virat, Light, as the consumer of food (and thus he gains the strength and stability of earth under the sun). 
4011 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, earth by brilliance as the consumer of food for strength. 
4012 :When he moved into living beings, he became Rudra, health giver, and thus moved. He made Oshadhis, herbs and trees as the consumers of food. 
4013 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, herbs and trees as the consumer of food for health and strength. 
4014 :When he moved towards the Pitrs, parents and grand parents, he became Yama, lord controller and dispenser of law and justice, and thus moved.He made Svadha, offerings to the pitrs, as the receivers and consumers of food. 
4015 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, Svadha, familial piety, as the receiver, consumer and giver of food for familial integrity. 
4016 :He moved towards humans, he became Agni and thus moved. He made Svaha, offerings to the divinities, as the receivers and consumers of food. 
4017 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, Svaha, yajnic fidelity, as the receiver, consumer and giver of food for strength and cohesion. 
4018 :When he moved into the upper direction, he became Brhaspati, dedicated to Veda, and thus moved. He made Vashatkara, oblations for cosmic balance of natural forces, as the receiver, consumer and giver of food. 
4019 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, Vashatkara as the receiver, consumer and giver of food for strength. 
4020 :When he moved to the Divinities, he became Ishana, the supreme power, and thus moved. He made Manyu, righteous passion, as the receiver and consumer of food. 
4021 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, Manyu as the receiver, consumer and giver of righteous passion. 
4022 :He moved towards the people, he became Prajapati and thus moved. He made Prana as the consumer of food for energy. 
4023 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, Pranic energy as the receiver consumer of food and giver of energy. 
4024 :He moved into all the interdirections of space, he became Parameshthi, the highest power, and thus moved. He made Brahma as the consumer of food. 
4025 :The man who knows this eats food, taking, and thus making, Brahma, the Supreme Spirit, as the receiver and consumer of food and the giver of spiritual enlightenment. 
4026 :Seven are the pranas, inhaling breath energies, seven apanas, exhaling energies, and seven vyanas, systemic energies. 
4027 :The first vital breath of that Vratya, ‘Urdhava’ or Upward by name, that is Agni, the fire of energy. 
4028 :The second vital breath energy of that Vratya is ‘Praudha’ by name, mature on top, and that is Aditya, the sun. 
4029 :The third pranic energy of this Vratya is Abhyudha’ by name, conveyed, communicated and reflected, and that is Chandrama, the moon. 
4030 :The fourth pranic energy of this Vratya is ‘Vibhu’ by name, and that is Pavamana, cosmic wind, the purifier. 
4031 :The fifth pranic energy of this Vratya is ‘Yoni’ by name, and that is these Apah, waters, sources of new forms. 
4032 :The sixth pranic energy of this Vratya is ‘Priya’ by name, the dear one, and that is these animals. 
4033 :The seventh pranic energy of this Vratya is ‘Aparimita’ by name, the Unbounded, and that is these living beings. 
4034 :Of the Vratya, the first apana is Paurnamasi, the full moon night (which cleanses and energises). 
4035 :Of the Vratya, the second apana is Ashtaka, the eighth of the fortnight. 
4036 :Of the Vratya, the third apana is Amavasya, the dark night. 
4037 :Of the Vratya, the fifth apana is Diksha, consecration. 
4038 :Of the Vratya, the seventh apana is Dakshina, yajnic gifts. 
4039 :Of the Vratya, the second vyana is antarisksha, the middle region, the firmament. 
4040 :Of the Vratya, the sixth vyana is the products of the seasons. 
4041 :Of the Vratya, the divinities serve and accomplish the purpose, one common to all things. They go round and round like the cycle of the seasons going round the year, or like all of them circumambulating the Vratya itself. 
4042 :Whatever the forms and phases of that Vratya, they, all living beings, enter the Sun, the self-refulgent One, whether they enter Amavasya, the dark night by the path of the progenitors, or Paumamasi, the full moon light by the path of the Divinities. 
4043 :Of that Aditya Vratya, that is the one immortality, that is the one oblation, the completion of The day-night cycle is the nostrils, the constant and mutable phases of Nature are two lobes of the brain, By day, Vratya goes westwards, by night, it goes east ward. 
4044 :The mighty cloud of the waters of life is released, the flood is on the flow, the divine fires of life are released, the lights radiate, ... 
4045 :Whatever is burning, depressing the mind, piercing and uprooting, consuming, polluting body and soul. 
4046 :All this I give up, let all this never touch me, let me never touch it again. 
4047 :And thus and thereby we give up all that is hostile and unfriendly to us and all that which we hate to suffer. 
4048 :O Vrshabha, cloud of divine showers, you are the pioneer of will and action. O will and actions of mind and will, I assign you all to the oceanic depths of the heart and soul suffered in the waters of divine light and generosity. 
4049 :The fire that is in the mind-and-will flow of action, breaking, piercing and polluting the body and senses, that fire I give up. 
4050 :O flow of will and action (of the individual and collective humanity), the fire that has entered you, that fire is cruel and destructive. 
4051 :That fire, let the flood of divine waters of the ‘cloud’ in the soul and in the power of the senses and mind sprinkle and consecrate into peace. 
4052 :Let the waters, the flow of will and action, purified and free from sin, dispel sin and evil from us. 
4053 :Let the waters of purity and divinity carry away sin and evil dreams and the consequences of evil dreams. 
4054 :O waters of purity, vibrations of divinity, radiations of holy light, watch and bless with the eye of peace, love and grace, touch and consecrate my body with your divine presence. 
4055 :We invoke the divine light of mind and divine fire of will and action vibrant in the divine waters and radiant in the light divine. O divine showers of light and grace, consecrate me with splendour as individual and as the human social order. 
4056 :Let adversity be away. Let there be strength and energy all round. Let speech be honey sweet. 
4057 :O thoughts, will and actions, be good and honey sweet. Let us speak words of honeyed sweetness. 
4058 :I have invoked my preceptor and protector of speech. I have invoked the protector and promoter of mind and senses. 
4059 :Let my ears be efficient in hearing. Let them be good so that I may hear good things. Let me hear good words of noble meaning. 
4060 :Let the divine voice of Shruti, Veda, and Upashruti, Smrti and recitation never forsake me. Let the eye, efficient and intense as that of the eagle, and the eternal light of Divinity never forsake me. 
4061 :O Lord of eternal light, you are the bed-rock foundation of the sages and of their vision and speech. Salutations to you, salutations to divine vision and speech. Salutations to the foundation and fountain-head of the sages’ vision and speech. 
4062 :Let me be on top of honour, wealth and excellence, let me rise to the top among equals. 
4063 :Let the splendour and power to break down evil, and the lustre and light of divine knowledge, never forsake me. Let wisdom and love of Dharma never Let havi, ladle and generosity never forsake me. Let the divine supporter and the sustainer never forsake me. Let the power to sustain and support never forsake me. 
4064 :Let the lord giver of Moksha and the moving wheel never forsake me. Let abundant flowing generosity and life giving cosmic wind never forsake me. 
4065 :Let Brhaspati, lord of boundless universe, be the inspirer of my soul, and universal generosity of human nature be at the core of my heart. 
4066 :let my progress and movement forwards be wide and long, and my nature be as deep as the ocean by virtue of my Dharma and virtue. 
4067 :Let me be at the centre of wealth, honour and excellence. Let me be at the centre of my equals. 
4068 :You are well settled at peace, rising like the holy dawn, and immortal among mortals. 
4069 :Let not prana forsake me, let not apana forsake me and go apart. 
4070 :Let the Sun protect me from the day’s fears, let Agni, fire, protect me from the earth’s fears, let Vayu protect me from fears of the sky, let Yama, lord of law and order, protect me from fears of the human world, and Sarasvati save me from fears of what happens on the earth. 
4071 :Let prana and apana not forsake me, let me not die out among men. 
4072 :Let all be good with happiness and well being day and night, today. Let all pranic energies and all activities be full of happiness and well being. Let me, with all my people and everything around, be happy, blessed with goodness and well being. 
4073 :O people of the world, be bold and powerful, may all living beings around me abide in joy. May Mitra and Varuna, divine sun and moon, give me prana and apana energies of nature, and Agni, heat and light of life, bless me with strength and efficiency. 
4074 :O dream, we know your origin, you are the child of seizure, you are an instrument of Yama. 
4075 :O dream, we know what you are. O sleep, save us from bad dreams. 
4076 :O dream, we know your origin, you are the child of adversity, you are an agent of Yama, You are a harbinger of the end, you are death indeed. O dream we know what you are. O sleep, save us from evil dreams. 
4077 :O dream, we know your origin, you are the child of want, you are an agent of Yama, you are a harbinger of the end, you are death indeed. 
4078 :O dream, we know what you are. O sleep, save us from bad dreams. 
4079 :O dream, we know your origin, you are the child of loss and want, you are an agent of Yama, you are a harbinger of the end, you are death indeed. 
4080 :O dream, we know what you are. O sleep, save us from evil dreams. 
4081 :O dream, we know your origin, you are the child of defeat and frustration, you are an agent of Yama, you are a harbinger of the end, you are death itself. 
4082 :O dream, we know what you are really. O sleep, save us from bad dreams. 
4083 :O dream, we know your origin, you are the child of disturbed mind and senses. You are an agent of Yama. 
4084 :O dream, we know what you are really. O sleep, protect us from evil dreams. 
4085 :We have won over bad dreams today. We have acquired what we had wanted to acquire, realised our noble dreams. We have become free from sin and guilt. 
4086 :Let the dawn dispel the evil dream, of which we were afraid. 
4087 :Take the evil dream to him that hates, to him that execrates. 
4088 :We send it to him that hates us, to him whom we hate to suffer (because of his curses). 
4089 :Let the lord and master of heavenly dawn join with the lord and master of holy speech, and the lord and master of holy speech join with the lord and master of heavenly dawn. 
4090 :(Indeed the two are together and inseparable. The mantra is an exhortation to the holy man of meditation.) Let the divine laws of nature carry back to that hater and execrator all miseries, notorieties and calamities... 
4091 :All ambitions which are not realisable, resolutions for wealth lost in poverty and fetters of hate and jealousy which are unbreakable. 
4092 :All these, O Agni, lord of light, may the Devas, divine laws and forces of nature, carry away to the man of hate and execration so that the evil doer may suffer the ineffectuality of his painful performance. 
4093 :I fix this evil dreamer with that ineffectuality which is the consequence of his sufferance and painful performance: I fix him with want and poverty. I fix him with loss and deprivation. I fix him with defeat and frustration. I fix him with seizure. I fix him with utter darkness and ignorance. 
4094 :I knock him down with terrible visitations of nature’s inevitable furies. 
4095 :I place him in the jaws of the ordeal of human destiny ordained by divine law of natural justice. 
4096 :Thus or otherwise let that dispensation of justice deal with the evil dreamer. 
4097 :Whoever hates us, his own conscience would reject him in that, and whoever we hate would arraign his own conscience. 
4098 :Here, through this dispensation, do I cleanse and wash away the evil dream present in the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4099 :Whatever evil dreams have come then and then again, that and that again, what at night, whatever the night before, Whatever while awake, whatever when asleep, whatever in the day, whatever at night, Whatever the dream I suffer day by day, of all that, I cleanse this mind and soul. 
4100 :O mind, O soul, O man, strike that off, eliminate it, be happy with that performance, cut off the very roots of it, break the very back and bones of it. 
4101 :Let the evil dream not live at all, let it not breathe, let the life breath forsake it. 
4102 :We have conquered, we have won. What we have won back is ours. What is broke open and discovered and recovered is ours. Rtam, the Law and truth is ours, splendour and glory is ours, Veda, knowledge is ours, Svah and heavenly joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, the people are ours, the brave heroes are our own. 
4103 :For this reason now, from all that was ours, which we have won back, we alienate that evil dreamer, who is son of such and such father and of such and such mother. 
4104 :May he never be free from the snares of that evil dream. 
4105 :And here I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy and his life and age, and here I place him down at the lowest. 
4106 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, heavenly joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, the people are ours, the brave heroes are ours. 
4107 :For this reason now, from all that was ours, which we have won back, we alienate that evil dreamer who is son of such and such father and of such and such mother. 
4108 :Let him never be free from the snares of adversity. And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4109 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, heavenly joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, the people are ours, the brave heroes are ours. 
4110 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer, son of so and so father and so and so mother. 
4111 :Let him never be free from the fetters of want and poverty. 
4112 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4113 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and heavenly joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, the people are ours, the brave heroes are ours. 
4114 :For this reason now, we alienate that evil dreamer, son of so and so father and so and so mother, from all that. 
4115 :Let him never be free from the fetters of loss and deprivation. 
4116 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4117 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and heavenly joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, the people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4118 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer, son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4119 :Let him never be free from the fetters of defeat and frustration. 
4120 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4121 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, the people are ours, the brave heroes are ours. 
4122 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4123 :Let him never be free from the fetters of his mind and senses. 
4124 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4125 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4126 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4127 :Let him never be free from the fetters of Brhaspati, lord and master of knowledge and power. 
4128 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4129 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4130 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4131 :Let him never be free from the fetters of Prajapati, lord ruler and protector of the people. 
4132 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4133 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, Yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4134 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4135 :Let him never be free from the fetters of the law and discipline of the Rshis, learned sages. 
4136 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4137 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4138 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4139 :Let him never be free from the rules and discipline of the literature and traditions established by the Rshis, sages of vision and wisdom. 
4140 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4141 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Law and truth is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4142 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer, who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4143 :Let him never be free from the discipline of the rules of the Angirasas, top rank scholars of science, technology and social sciences. 
4144 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4145 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Ours is Rtam, ours is splendour, ours is Brahma, ours is peace and joy, ours is yajna, ours is wealth and cattle, the people are ours, the heroes are ours. 
4146 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer, who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4147 :Let him never be free from the discipline of the rules and traditions established by the disciples and followers of the Angirasas. 
4148 :And here now, I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4149 :What we have won is ours, what we have recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4150 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4151 :Let him never be free from the rules and discipline of the Atharvans, scholars of the eternal laws of the Atharva-veda. 
4152 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4153 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Ours is Rtam, truth and law, ours is splendour, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, the heroic brave are ours. 
4154 :For this reason now, from all that we alienate that evil dreamer who is son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4155 :Let him never be free from the strict rules and discipline of the literature and traditions established by the disciples and follwers of the Atharvans. 
4156 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4157 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Ours is the Truth and Law of Rtam, ours is splendour, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4158 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4159 :Let him never be free from the rules and discipline of the protectors and promoters of the herbs and trees of the environment. 
4160 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4161 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4162 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4163 :Let him never be free from the laws and rules relating to the herbs and trees of the forests and the environment. 
4164 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4165 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Vedic knowledge is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4166 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4167 :Let him never be free from the rules and discipline relating to the seasons. 
4168 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4169 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4170 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4171 :Let him never be free from the rules and discipline relating to the seasonal products of nature through the year. 
4172 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4173 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4174 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4175 :Let him never be free from the limitations and discipline of the rules relating to the months. 
4176 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4177 :What is win is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4178 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4179 :Let him never be free from the bonds and limitations of the fortnights. 
4180 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4181 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4182 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4183 :Let him never be free from the bonds and fetters of the day-night cycle. 
4184 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4185 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4186 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4187 :Let him never be free from the bonds and fetters of the ‘day-night united’ unit. 
4188 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4189 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4190 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4191 :Let him never be free from the chains of the laws of earth and heaven. 
4192 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and his life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4193 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4194 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4195 :Let him never be free from the bonds and chains of Indra and Agni, power and light. 
4196 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and life and age, and thus I place him down at the lowest. 
4197 :What is won is ours, what is recovered is ours. Truth and law is ours, splendour is ours, Brahma is ours, peace and joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, brave heroes are ours. 
4198 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that evil dreamer who is the son of such and father and such and such mother. 
4199 :Let him never be free from the bonds and chains of Mitra and Varuna, love and justice of the world system. 
4200 :And here now I arrest and freeze his honour, lustre, pranic energy, and life and age, and thus I put him down at the lowest. 
4201 :What is won is ours, what is uncovered and recovered is ours, Rtam, universal truth and law is ours, splendour and brilliance is ours, Brahma, universal knowledge of the Veda, is ours, Svah, universal peace and divine joy is ours, yajna is ours, wealth and cattle is ours, people are ours, heroic brave are ours. 
4202 :For this reason now, from all that, we alienate that dreamer of evil dreams who is the son of such and such father and such and such mother. 
4203 :Let him never be released from the bonds and chains of the law of ruling Varuna, enlightened ruler of the world. 
4204 :And here now I arrest, delimit and freeze his honour and lustre, pranic energy, and life and age, and thus I put him down at the lowest. 
4205 :What we have conquered from the external and internal enemy is ours. Whatever is broke open, discovered and recovered is ours. The splendour and glory is ours. Brahma, universal knowledge of the Veda, is ours. Svah, heavenly light, peace and joy is ours. Yajna, creative action, freedom of assembly and freedom of contribution is ours. Wealth and cattle, all is ours. The people are ours. The heroic brave are ours. 
4206 :For this reason, now that we are free and all is ours, we alienate that dreamer of evil dreams (who had deprived us of our identity and freedom), scion of such and such lineage, son of such and such mother, from all that he had grabbed. 
4207 :Let him never be released from the shackles and snares of death. 
4208 :And here now I arrest, delimit and freeze his honour and lustre, pranic energy, and life and age, and thus I cut him down to size and put him down at the What we have won is ours. What is broke open, uncovered and recovered is ours. I have won all battles and frustrated all enemy’s hostile tactics. 
4209 :This is what Agni, lord of light and fire of life, said, this is what Soma, lord of peace and universal happiness, said for me: “May Pusha, lord of life and nourishment, bless you”. I pray: May Pusha establish me in the world of noble action and blessed joy. 
4210 :Let us rise to heavenly light and joy. We have risen to heavenly light and divine bliss. We have risen and have joined with the light of the Sun. 
4211 :Yajna is the way to rise in honour, wealth and excellence. Yajna is the treasure hold of wealth, honour and excellence. Let me have the ambition and effort with competence to win wealth and excellence. I pray I may be blest with wealth, honour and excellence. 
4212 :O lord of wealth and excellence, raise and establish me in abundance and prosperity of the wealth of life. 
4213 :I invoke and pray to Indra, adorable lord omnipotent, instant challenger of contradictions, constant warrior, intense fighter, more and ever more powerful, yet steady and patient, ultimate victor. Master ordainer of his own power is he, winner of the light of heaven, self-controlled ruler of the earth, and ultimate unifier of the diverse wealth of nations into a commonwealth of humanity. 
4214 :O lord, in all sincerity I pray, bless me with a long full age of good health and prosperity. 
4215 :I invoke Indra, truly the lord adorable and omnipotent, instant challenger of conflicts and contradictions, constant warrior, intense fighter, more and ever more powerful, yet steady and patient ultimate victor. Master ordainer of his own power is he, winner of the light of heaven, self-controlled ruler of the earth, and ultimate unifier of the diverse wealth of nations into a common-wealth of humanity. 
4216 :O lord, in all sincerity I pray, may I be the dear darling of the Devas, divinities of nature, heaven and earth. 
4217 :I invoke Indra, verily the lord adorable and omnipotent, instant challenger of conflicts and contratictions, constant warrior, intense fighter, more and ever more powerful, yet steady and patient victor. Master ordainer of his own power and victory is he, winner of the light of heaven, self-controlled ruler of the earth, and ultimate unifier of the diverse wealth of nations into a common-wealth of humanity. 
4218 :O lord, in all sincerity I pray, may I be the dear love of all people. 
4219 :I invoke Indra, verily the lord adorable and omnipotent, instant challenger of conflicts and contradictions, constant warrior, intense fighter, more and ever more persistent, powerful, yet steady and patient victor. Master ordainer of his own power and victory is he, winner of the light of heaven, self- controlled ruler of the earth, and ultimate unifier of the diverse wealth of nations into a common-wealth of humanity. 
4220 :O lord, in all humility and sincerity I pray, may I be the favourite love of all animals. 
4221 :I invoke Indra, verily the lord adorable and omnipotent, instant challenger of conflicts and contradictions, constant warrior, intense fighter, more and ever more persistent powerful, yet steady and patient victor. Master ordainer of his own power and victory is he, winner of the light of heaven, self-controlled ruler of the earth, and ultimate unifier of the diverse wealth of nations into a common-wealth of humanity. 
4222 :O lord, in all humility and sincerity I pray, may I be the self-fulfilled and bounteous centre of the love of my equals. 
4223 :Rise, O Sun, rise with splendour, rise higher and higher and shine on me and for me. May the enemy, both external and internal, be subject to me. Let me never be subdued by the enemy. O Vishnu, lord omnipotent, infinite are your powers and exploits. Bless us with all forms of perceptive organs and serviceable living beings. Pray establish me in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest region of Divinity. 
4224 :Rise, O Sun, rise with splendour, rise higher and higher and shine on me and for me. Whoever and whatever I see, whoever and whatever I do not see, among them give me a holy mind and noble intelligence. O Vishnu, lord omnipotent, infinite are your powers and exploits. Bless us with all forms of perceptive organs and serviceable living beings. Pray establish me in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4225 :O Sun, the bonds and snares which co-exist here in the dynamics of existence do not affect, much less subdue, you. Having left the hate, envy and jealousy down here, you rise to the heavens above. O lord, be kind and gracious to us. Let us enjoy your love and good will. O Vishnu, infinite are your powers and exploits. Bless us with all forms of perceptive organs and serviceable living beings. Pray establish me in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4226 :O lord omnipotent Indra, pray protect and promote us to achieve great good fortune by irresistible light and splendour of Divinity. O lord omnipresent, Vishnu, infinite are your powers and potentials. Bless us with all forms of perceptive organs and serviceable living beings. Pray establish me in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4227 :O lord omnipotent, Indra, be kind most gracious to us with your blissful modes of protection and progress, rising to the three levels of heavenly light, radiating the light and proclaiming the divine voice of knowledge for our paradisal bliss and well being as our dearest haven and abode. O lord omnipresent, Vishnu, infinite are your powers and exploits. Bless us with all forms of perceptive organs and serviceable living beings. Pray establish me in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4228 :Indra, lord omnipotent, you are the sole victorious lord of the universe, omniscient and omnipresent Lord Almighty invoked and adored by all humanity. O lord, Indra, pray inspire and energise this holy song of invocation and celebration, and be kind and gracious that we may live happy in your love and good will. O lord omnipresent Vishnu, infinite are your powers and potentials. Bless us with all forms of perceptive, organs and serviceable living beings and establish us in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4229 :Indra, lord omnipotent, indomitable power and presence immanent in heaven, on earth and in the middle regions, no one has comprehended your grandeur and glory, celebrated and glorified more and ever higher exalted by the divine hymns of Veda, self-revealed in the highest state of divine consciousness in meditation, pray give us mental peace and spiritual bliss. O lord omnipresent, Vishnu, infinite are your powers and actions. Bless us with universal forms of perceptive organs and serviceable living beings. Pray establish me in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4230 :Indra, lord omnipotent, your power and presence that is in the waters, that which is on earth, and that which is in the fire, your power and presence that blows in the wind, that purifies and shines in the light of heaven, the power and presence by which you pervade the firmament, by the same presence and power, lord omnipotent, give us peace and bliss. O lord omnipresent, Vishnu, infinite are your mighty acts and powers, bless us with universal forms of perceptive organs and serviceable living beings. Pray establish us in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4231 :Indra, lord omnipotent, seers and sages praying to you for divine bliss sit through sessions of yajna and meditation, celebrating and exalting you with Vedic chant. O Vishnu, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, infinite are your powers and exploits. Pray bless us with the fulfilment of our earthly mission and, with universal forms of perception and vision, establish us in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4232 :Lord omnipresent, Vishnu, you pervade and inspire the thousand-streamed heavenly light of the adorable and inexhaustible Veda, vibrating in the triple world of heaven, earth and the firmament. O Vishnu, pray bless us with the fulfilment of our earthly mission and, with universal forms of perception and vision, establish us in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. Infinite are your acts and powers. 
4233 :You pervade and protect all four quarters of space. With your blazing splendour you shine and illuminate heaven and earth. You pervade and abide by all these regions of the universe. Lord omniscient, you inform and traverse by all the paths of universal truth and the universal law of Rtam operative in the universal dynamics of existence. Vishnu, lord omnipresent, infinite are your acts and powers in the universe, pray bless us with the fulfilment of our earthly mission and, with universal forms of perception and vision, establish us in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4234 :By five, I know, you shine far out in the outer world, by one, I know, you shine at the closest, within. When the time is good and clear is the day, you stem out malignant darkness, you vibrate, shine and illuminate here inside. O Vishnu, infinite are your powers and exploits. Pray bless us with the fulfilment of our earthly mission and, with universal forms of perception and vision, establish us in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4235 :You are Indra, the mighty, you are mightiest of the mighties, Mahendra. You are loka, the world, the beauty, the ecstasy, and you are Prajapati, creative sustainer and progenitor of all your children. For you is yajna enacted and extended, for you the yajna- performers offer the oblations. O Vishnu, infinite are your powers and wondrous your functions. Pray bless us with the fulfilment of our life and, with universal forms of perception and vision, establish us in the nectar joy of immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4236 :The Sat, constant Being, is transformed into Asat, the mutable Becoming. The Bhuta, generated and manifested world of mutable Becoming, is rooted in Sat, constant Being. Bhuta, what is, is already there in what is to be, in the Bhavya, and the Bhavya, what is to be, is rooted in Bhuta, what is and what has been. (In other words, the world of past, present and future is integrated, simultaneous and constant. Being transforms into Becoming, and Becoming is Being in the essence. Being and Becoming, Sat and Asat, three variations of time, what has been, what is, and what is yet to be, all these variations are but different facets of the same, one, constant reality. Constancy and Mutability are essentially one and the same). 
4237 :Lord Vishnu, wondrous infinite are your powers and exploits. Pray bless us with fulfilment of our mission in this world of change, and with universal forms of perception and vision of the One Constant in the many mutables establish us in the nectar joy of immutable immortality in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4238 :O Sun, you are pure and powerful. You are bright and blazing. As you are bright and blazing by the power of the self-refulgent Indra, so may I be bright, ever shining by the light and grace of self-refulgent Vishnu. 
4239 :You are love and splendour itself. You are bright and lovely. O Sun, just as you are bright and beautiful by the sublime refulgence of Indra, so may I be bright and lovable by virtue of the perception of universal senses and mind and by the grace of the light and lustre of those sages who are blest by the self-refulgent Indra and omnipresent Vishnu. 
4240 :Homage to the rising Sun, homage to the rising Sun in the ascendance, homage to the Sun high on the Zenith, homage to the Refulgent, homage to the Self- Refulgent, homage to the All-Refulgent! Homage to the declining Sun, homage to the setting Sun, homage to the Sun gone to set, homage to the Refulgent, homage to the Self-Refulgent, homage to the All-Refulgent! Risen is the Sun yonder with all the world’s glory, subjecting for me all rivals and adversaries to me, and I pray I may never be subject to adversaries, internal or external whatever. O Vishnu, self-refulgent lord omnipresent, infinite wondrous are your acts and powers. Pray bless us with senses and mind of universal perception and vision, and by those establish us in the nectar joy of immortality beyond mutability in the highest regions of Divinity. 
4241 :O Aditya, self-refulgent lord, you have ascended the hundred-oared ark of life with me for our well-being. You have helped me cross over the day, kindly help me to cross over the night as well. 
4242 :O Aditya, self-refulgent lord, you have ascended the hundred-oared ark of life with me for our well-being. You have helped me cross over the night. Pray help me to cross over the day as well. 
4243 :I am covered and protected by the Vedic armour of Prajapati, father, protector and sustainer of his children of humanity. I am wrapped and protected by the light and lustre of Kashyapa, lord of wisdom and protection against all fears and ailments. I pray that I may live my life doing noble and vigorous acts worthy of the brave upto a ripe age of full hundred years. 
4244 :I am covered and guarded deeply and wholly all round by the Vedic armour of Lord Supreme, Brahma. I am wrapped and protected by the light and splendour of Kashyapa, lord of wisdom, pranic energy and natural strength. I pray and I affirm that the arrows and attacks shot and mounted against me either by natural or human powers, even though they be meant to kill, shall never reach and never touch me. 
4245 :I am protected by Rtam, eternal truth and the laws of eternal truth. I am protected by all the seasons through the year. And I am protected by the past and future of my life as pursued or to be pursued in accordance with the laws of eternal truth. Never must any sin or anything sinful ever approach me. Never must even death violate me. I have sin and fear of death washed away and disappear from within me by the holy waters of Vedic speech. 
4246 :Agni, leading light of life, my protector, may, I pray, protect and promote me all round against all dangers and negativities. May the rising sun strike off and keep away the snares of decline and death. May the radiant dawns dispelling darkness, the clouds and fixed mountains and the pranic energies all join, exert in me and rejuvenate me a thousand ways, a thousandfold. 
4247 :Mantras 1-16 are a dialogue between Yama, a ‘young man’, and Yami, a ‘young maiden’, on love, marriage, family and continuance of the family line. The same theme is celebrated in Rgveda 10, 10, 1-14. 
4248 :The dialogue has been interpreted by Sayana and others as a dialogue between a brother and a sister, which is not correct because, if it were so, the name of the girl would be ‘Yama’, not Yami. Yama himself and Yami describe themselves as ‘friends’ in mantra 1 and 2. 
4249 :The dialogue has also been interpreted as a dialogue between day and night, so close and yet so divergent they meet but only to part. 
4250 :On the theme of love, marriage, family and pitaras, let us take the dialogue as an act of courtship between the ‘male’ and ‘female’ twins of nature. Yama describes them as childrren of the Sun and Earth in mantra 4. 
4251 :Yami: With love and desire I come to a friend of my own choice, a friend who has a long way crossed the vast ocean of life, and I solicit and pray that knowing and thinking of your fulfilment of familial obligation on earth, you beget a successor saviour of your father’s familial line and in marriage bless me with a child. 
4252 :Yama: Your friend accepts not your proposal of friendship, love and union since, for the purpose of conjugality, you are not homogeneous with him in character and versality of merit and maturity, in fact you are the contrary. Indeed the brave progeny of the great lord of life and energy of nature refulgent with light and wisdom who maintain the light of heaven along with the earth take exception to such a union, in fact they watch, wonder and rule out such a proposal for union. 
4253 :Yami: The immortal sustainers of earth and heaven do wish that every mortal should leave at least one descendent child. I have accepted that your mind and soul be one with me, so, pray come and join me in body as husband and as life-giver of your child. 
4254 :Yama: Having observed the laws of divine nature and what we have spoken as truth, shall we now do things in violation of truth and speak untruth? Sinfully? Gandharva, the sun, our father, and his light and earth sustained in waters, the mother, that is the central relationship of us both, highest and permanent. (Nothing more, no other.) Yami: Our generator Savita, creator of the universe, Tvashta, maker of universal forms, and Kah, sustainer of created forms, made us a couple of male and female conjugality in nature’s womb of generation itself as keepers and sustainers of this earthly home. None can now violate the rules of the Lord’s discipline, no one does. Of this complementarity of natural conjugal relationship, the earth knows, the sun in heaven knows. 
4255 :Yama: The Almighty God joins the pursuants and celebrants of truth with the business of life, men of noble action, brilliant, passionate opponents of evil, who shoot arrows into the heart of contradictory forces, and bring peace and well being to life. That person lives in reality who maintains such people and promotes their mission. 
4256 :Who knows of that complementarity of man and woman in conjugality created on the first day of creation by Savita-Tvashta? Who saw that? And who would speak of that here now? Only he knows who created that. As of now, who witnessed it? Who can vouchsafe it now? Vast is the distance between east, the house of Mitra, sun and the day, and west, the house of Varuna, presiding deity of the night. (We cannot meet). But O wanton dear, how do you so deceptively speak of men? Yami: O Yama, I feel stricken and I come with desire to share life with you in one house and one bed and wish I should surrender my body to you as wife does to the husband so that we may carry on the business of life like the two wheels of a chariot. 
4257 :Yama: These watchful lights of starry divinities which sojourn here around in space neither stop nor deviate from their path, nor do they ever wink their eye. O love-lorn maiden, go soon to one such other than me and with him carry on the business of life like a chariot wheel. 
4258 :Yami: I wish the eye of the sun were to open again and again, and the days with nights and the nights with days were to favour and enlighten him that just as the sun is in union with the earth together, so would Yamis too like nights join Yama, the day, as strangers, in love. 
4259 :O Yami, those times would follow long long ages hence when contraries would lie together and coexist without contradictions. Therefore for the time being, O sweet and debonair, extend your hand to someone else other than me, a real virile man. 
4260 :Yami: O Yama, what? Then have you become a supporter without support? And I, without support and care, become a stream of life, bereft and forlorn, going away elsewhere in search of another? Love lorn, I am babbling so much, pray join me body with body. 
4261 :d df dTST <MU|dl^fdT d cf dd TFTli d ^qrsrrq i 3ddd UrUUd': dFldddd dd dtd/ddd d^JddJI II Yama: O Yami, I am not your master, not your husband, so I would not embrace your body with mine. So think of enjoying yourself with someone other than me. O fortunate one, the twin friend of yours does not like this union. 
4262 :And I would not touch your body with mine. The wise say that for a twin it is sin to meet a sister in conjugality. It is against my mind and heart that a brother should even think of sleeping with a sister. 
4263 :Yami: Sorry Yama, it is a pity I did not understand your mind and heart this way of nature and tradition. May be someone other than me would join you like a girdle round your waist and embrace you as a creeper clings by a tree. 
4264 :Yama: O Yami, you too find some other partner. Some other may embrace you, and you too embrace him like a creeper embracing the tree. Love you the other man heart and soul, and may he too love you heart and soul. Thus may you create and achieve a happy union in love and good fortune. 
4265 :Sages and scholars of Shastra and Vedas study and foster three joyous gifts of nature and divinity, versatile in form, sensitively satisfying and universally illuminative for body, sense and mind and the soul. For this purpose, they are: waters for taste and sweetness, winds for energy of prana, and herbs for strength and alleviation of pain. And all these three are vested and concentrated in the same one source, Nature. 
4266 :Generous lord divine, omnipotent and undaunted, with cosmic churning, distils the nectar sweets of heaven from mother Aditi, imperishable Prakrti, for generous humanity. He, lord omniscient of infinite wisdom knows the universe and showers the knowledge of Veda too for mankind. And the generous scholar, man of judgement, venerable as Varuna, distils universal knowledge from Veda according to his intelligence and vision, joins the divine seasons and distils the joyous gifts of food, energy and illumination from nature and Vedic vision. 
4267 :Gandharvi, Vedic voice that holds and expresses the voice of the Lord of the universe, which is adorable and inspiring and which eternally proclaims the divine Word, may, we pray, establish and promote our mind and soul in the celebration of the resounding flood of the divine voice. And may Aditi, Mother Nature, and her eternal voice, and Agni, leading light of life, first and highest brotherly supporter, establish us at the centre of our desire and fulfilment and continue to speak to us of nature, knowledge and wisdom. 
4268 :Surely the illuminant, auspicious, abundant, brilliant, beatifying light of the dawn of divine vision arises when the sages invoke and kindle and raise the loving divine fire of Agni, high priest of divine-human communion, in accordance with the passion and devotion of the lovers of Divinity for the success of their meditative yajna. 
4269 :When noble dedicated people choose, invoke and adore this blissful Agni, high priest of meditative as well as social yajna, and when the vision of clairvoyance arises, then the instant, inspiring eagle spirit of divinity brings in the infinite, illuminative nectar shower of divine bliss to the devotee in the meditative communion. 
4270 :Agni, divine spirit of man’s holy yajna of love and non-violence, you are always lovable and inspiring as sumptuous food for the mind and soul. And, served and adorable with abundant offers of homage and oblations, having accepted and enjoying the homage, you come fast and bless the vibrant devotee’s yajna with success and attainments. 
4271 :Agni, leading light of life, inspire the parents: The sun augments honour and excellence, the lover is eager to meet the love, anxious with heart and soul, the messenger speaks and inspires, the oblations energise, pranic energy stirs the mind. 
4272 :enjoys your good will, bears your light and wisdom and proclaims it,, wins the ear of his audience and rises to fame. Bearing and enjoying plenty and prosperity of food, energy and love, moving by horse drawn chariot he adds to the strength and splendour of his life and time. 
4273 :O leading life of existence, Agni, listen to our voice of prayer in this hall of yajna, harness the superfast chariot of immortality and bring us here the heaven and earth with their divine children, never forsake the divinities in human form, always abide by us here itself. 
4274 :Agni, adorable leading light and ruling lord of life, when this Samiti, assembly of the people, becomes elevated, enlightened, acceptable and companionable among noble and enlightened people and you come to distribution of the jewel valuables of life, pray give us our share of the wealth, honour and excellence of life Agni, cosmic light of existence, all pervasive, first presence, self-manifestive, omniscient of all forms, potential and actual, one with the sun, exists in advance of the dawns and days, and pervades the stars, the dawns, the radiating rays and the earth and heaven (as they come into existence). 
4275 :Agni, light of existence, all pervasive, first presence, self-manifestive, omniscient of all forms potential and actual, exists before and pervades and watches as they come into existence, every one of the dawns, every one of the days, and many ways extends and pervades every sun, the radiating rays and heaven and earth as they expand and multiply. 
4276 :Heaven and earth are the first and closest divinities by virtue of the cosmic order to listen to the holy chant and proclaim their response with light and generosity when Agni, refulgent spirit of life and light of the world, chief yajamana and inspirer of cosmic yajna, calling mortals to the altar, settles in the vedi itself upfront, generating and accelerating the radiation of its own energy in the yajnic process of evolution being enacted. 
4277 :May Agni, supreme power and presence of the spirit over divinities of heaven and earth, first and instant cognizant of our invocation and prayers, radiate and carry our homage and oblations to the divinities of nature by the laws of its cosmic order: Agni, that is the power with the banner of light and fragrance, blazing with flames of fuel fire, adorable sublime, divine call for action and self-sacrifice, eternal and imperishable, loving and companionable, responsive to words of sincere adoration. 
4278 :Listen ye both heaven and earth to my words of adoration: I celebrate you both heaven and earth as father and mother, givers of the liquid energies of life for the growth and progress of humanity and the environment, which, may the brilliant geniuses of humanity, taking forward the energy projects and policies of the world, promote day and night incessantly and which, may the parental powers and leadership of mankind refine and augment further to add to the light and sweetness of life here on earth. 
4279 :When the celestial nectar of this refulgent power’s own essence radiates, then the energies generated by it support and sustain both earth and heaven, and all divinities of nature and humanity receive and celebrate these gifts of Agni, the divine beauty, radiance and liquid energies which the divine light showers upon them. 
4280 :Does the ruling refulgent Agni receive and accept our homage? Do we sometimes overstep its laws and limits of benediction and experimentation? Who knows this secret we ought to know? Agni is a friend after all, invoked and served with excess or remiss, it would accept our homage and adoration and convey it to the divinities, and we pray may there be success and ultimate victory. 
4281 :Incomprehensible is this mystery of immortal Agni and its power, for sure, since arising from the same one source and homogeneous, it grows to boundless variety of forms which, nevertheless, for the man who knows the One Supreme Agni, ordainer and controller of this existential variety, is simple and clearly understandable. This man, O lord great and gracious, protect and promote without relent. 
4282 :In whose being the divinities of nature and humanity rejoice in the yajnic order of existence, carry on their assigned tasks in the regions of light and in the heart and soul of humanity, vest light in the sun and dark tinge in the moon, that refulgent Agni, the sun and moon and all other divinities constantly adore and serve. 
4283 :In whose illuminative yet mysterious being all divine powers exist and act, we know not well. May the same refulgent Agni, the divine powers reveal to us who are simple, sincere and conscientious seekers of Divinity, so that we may distinctly and intelligently know and serve the divine power. May Mitra, universal spirit of divine love as the sun, Aditi, imperishable mother Nature, self-refulgent Savita, creator and inspirer, reveal the mysterious power and presence of Agni. 
4284 :of adoration in honour of Indra, lord of power, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment, in order to glorify the noblest leader of resolute will and inviolable command. 
4285 :O heroic leader and ruler, by virtue of your strength and will you are renowned as destroyer of evil for having eliminated evil, want and suffering. You are famous as the lord magnanimous of glory for your wealth and generosity because your generosity exceeds the expectations of the richest generous people. 
4286 :Just as the sun shines upon the earth and transcends, so do you, O Indra, ruler, rule the earth. Let pleasant winds blow upon the vast earth for us. Let Mitra, divine love, and Varuna, divine judgement, as sun and air, together, remove our pain and suffering as fire releases its heat in the forest and burns away unwanted undergrowth. 
4287 :O man, worship and adore Rudra, vibrant in the soul, self-refulgent ruler of humanity, closest at heart, terrible destroyer of evil instantly. 
4288 :O Rudra, celebrated and adored by humanity, be kind and gracious to the dedicated worshippers, and let the force of your punitive power fall upon other forces than us, such as hate and enmity, sin and suffering, all alien to us. 
4289 :People dedicated to Divinity invoke and worship Sarasvati, Mother Voice of divine Omniscience. They worship her in the performance of yajna while the fragrance is expanding and light is radiating. People of holy action invoke and worship Sarasvati while they act. May Sarasvati give to the generous worshipper and yajna performer the fruit the singer of the song divine prays for. 
4290 :Parental house-holders eager to perform yajna with generous gifts of Dakshina invoke and worship Sarasvati, mother Spirit of Voice divine. O mother, come and grace this holy vedi with your divine presence, rejoice with the dedicated worshippers and bring us food and energy, wealth, honour and excellence free from all kinds of negativities. 
4291 :Sarasvati, vibrant mother voice of Divinity who come with celestial joy in response to songs of adoration and oblations of holy fragrance, divine mother rejoicing with parental house-holders, pray come and bless the yajamana with food and energy, wealth, honour and excellence for body, mind and soul, a rightful share worth a thousand laudations. 
4292 :May the wise and parental seniors of average, high and middle order, harbingers of peace and joy, friendly dynamic scholars and scientists of yajna who know the cosmic order and the laws of nature and living truths of life, rise, inspire us with energy and enthusiasm for life, and may all these saviour and protective powers of nature and humanity strengthen us to defend and promote ourselves in internal and external challenges of life and the environment. 
4293 :I know and join the holy, wise, generous and parental powers of humanity. I know the stable, radiative and expansive powers and presence of yajna and its creative effects. O scholars and scientists of yajna who join the creative fire enterprise here on the vedi with your inputs of knowledge and expertise, come and partake of the freshness and fragrance of fruits produced and given by yajna. 
4294 :and pranic energies radiating from the east and west, let it also be for the parental wise and seniors of the past and later ones. Let it be for the energies which abide in the earthly sphere and in space and skies, and let it be for the energy which vibrates in the living forms of nature anywhere, and for the wise anywhere in humanity. 
4295 :May Matali, master creator of knowledge and power with wise experts of Vedic science, Yama, the yogi with vibrant pranic energies, Brhaspati, eminent scholar with all round versatility rising with the application of Rk verses, those whose natural knowledge of life and environment has raised them to eminence, and those who advance natural knowledge and extend the work of earlier dedicated scholars, may all these parental seniors protect and promote us in the serious struggles we face for the advancement of life and knowledge. 
4296 :it, is delicious, it is honey sweet, it is strong and intense, and its flavour is soothing, sobering and exciting too. Whoever the soul that has tasted of it is strong, a very Indra, whom no one can challenge in the pressing battles of life. 
4297 :With homage of havi and self-sacrifice in karma, serve and worship Yama, leading light and ruler of life with justice and dispensation, who shows the paths of living for all and leads the pioneers of initiative and advancement to distant lands of their choice and who, lord of the worlds of light like regent of the Sun, is the ultimate haven and home of people. 
4298 :Yama, lord of ultimate justice and dispensation, first carved, manifested and proclaimed the universal way of life according to the laws of nature. And that is the way and the law of life in existence which is neither challengeable nor changeable. That is the path by which our ancestors went forward in life, and that same is the path by which others who come later, know and go according to their own choice for themselves. 
4299 :O parental powers of nature and humanity, scholars of the science of atmospheric and environmental management of the globe, for all round peace and protection of life here and here-after, we have prepared these yajnic materials for homage to you which please accept and use with love and faith. O masters, come always with peaceful modes of universal protection, bear and bring us showers of peace and freedom from sin, violence and fear. 
4300 :O saviour sages of the world, with knees bent in honour of the vedi, please be seated on the right, accept our homage of havi and accomplish the yajna with specific words of appraisal. And if we happen to transgress some rule or ritual of yajnic manners, or if we happen to be impertinent to you - because we are human, after all - pray be kind, take no offence, forgive us, and let no hurt affect the yajna. 
4301 :Tvashta, cosmic maker of the forms of existence, for fulfilment of the creative urge of nature, Prakrti, initiates the onward process of evolution, and the entire universe comes into being in cosmic time. While Prakrti, consort of the self-refulgent creator Savita and mother origin of the order of evolution, is fertilized and moves on to its generative function, it disappears, that is, it transforms from its original intangible essence into the tangible creative form and generative power in existence. 
4302 :Go forward, O man, move on by the paths of life earlier and universally carved for you, paths by which the ancients too went forward to complete their course of life. Intelligent you are and you see both Yama and Varuna, divine sun and divine night, all- comprehending time and the spirit of cosmic judgement, the solar region and the cosmic waters, both divine, brilliant, ecstatic, ruling strong in terms of their own powers, and agreeable by your service to them and to the environment. 
4303 :All disturbances to go, go away, go far, your own ways. Pitr-prana energies of solar radiation, which have carried this soul, departed, gone away, carried around by sun rays, have prepared this new phase for it, and Yama, cosmic order of law and time, has provided this other stage of its existential being with days, nights, dawns and liquid energies, all anew. 
4304 :O sacred fire of yajna, with love and passion we light you. With love and faith we raise you into flames. You too with love and longing of heat and light bring our parental seniors and blissful energies of Mother Nature to receive our offerings and disperse them round for all. 
4305 :Brilliant and passionate with love, we light you up. Brilliant and faithful we raise you into flames. O sacred fire of yajna, you too, brilliant and blazing, bring our senior and parental powers of nature and humanity to receive our offerings and disperse them round for all. 
4306 :Our parents and seniors are seers and sages of holistic knowledge, scholars of latest sciences, undisturbed pursuers of technology and engineering, veteran saviours from pain and suffering, and seekers of peace and prosperity. 
4307 :Let us dedicate ourselves to their vision and wisdom and be the recipients of their good will so that we may enjoy their love and grace. 
4308 :O Yama, life time of health and age, come with nature’s pranic energies of various and versatile sort worthy of union and assimilation according to time and seasons, be happy and rejoice with me. I invoke the refulgent sun, your generative father, also to come and be seated at the holy heart core of this life yajna of mine for a full age of good health and happiness. 
4309 :O Yama, happy life time of health and age, come in unison with nourishing and protective pranic energies of nature and vest those energies into my yajnic body system. Let thoughts and health mantras of sages bring you here where, shining and ruling within with all these gifts, rejoice and make me happy too. 
4310 :Just as blazing brilliant Angirasas, winners of the earth, inspired with pranic spirit, march forward by paths of freedom, so do these spiritual adventurers, the pitaras, rise from here, rise to the heights of heaven, and reach the realm of freedom in Moksha. 
4311 :Soma distilled and sanctified, and for Yama it flows. For Yama, the yajna havi is prepared. And to Yama goes the holy soma-yajna with all its beauty and power conducted by the holy fire, divine messenger between the yajamana and the air, sun and the lord ordainer of life and human karma. 
4312 :Offer the sweetest and holiest honeyed oblations to Yama, lord of time and refulgent sovereign of the cosmic order, and thereby abide on the right side of karmic destiny. This homage is in honour of the sagely seers, forefathers and the ancients who carved the paths of life for us. 
4313 :Offer holy homage full of ghrta and milk to Yama, refulgent ruler of life and the law of Karma. And may the lord bless us with strength and efficiency of body, mind and senses and bring us a long life of good health and happiness. 
4314 :O Agni, Jataveda, all knowing, all pervading fire of divine discipline, do not bum it wholly, do not hurt or dry it up in its identity, do not destroy its sense of perception and its body form. And when you have cleansed it of its dross and tempered it fully, send it up to the Pitaras, sustainers of living energy and life. 
4315 :When you have cleansed it of its dross and tempered it fully, send it up to the Pitaras, sustainers of living energy and life onward, and when he connects with the process of life and life energy within the laws of nature, then he will join with the further laws and dynamics of divinities in life and nature with his own mind and intelligence. 
4316 :(Mantras 4 and 5 have been interpreted in connection with the antyeshti sanskara of the dead and also in relation to the education and discipline of a Brahmachari. The Agni in one case is the funeral fire, and in the other case it is the teacher who maintains the discipline of spartan fire relentlessly. In the one case, the soul concerned goes to the Pitaras, that is, sun-rays, in the other case the Brahmachari goes home to his parents. In either case, the situation is transition of the person from one stage of life to another after having passed through the crucibles of fiery discipline.) The great one, supreme, infinite, omnipotent is One, vibrates, rules and pervades the variety of existence by three dimensions of time, past, present and future, six seasons of the year, three regions of space, heaven, earth and the firmament, and the six directions. Trishtubh, Gayatri and other chhandas abide in the one Word, Aum, as all orders of matter, energy and thought abide in the infinite Shakti of Aum. And all these orders of omniscience, omnipresence and omnipotence abide in One, emerge from That and converge into That: Yama, the ordainer. 
4317 :O soul, with your vision of the eye go to the sun, with your pranic energy of the soul go to the wind, or in consequence of your Dharma and karmic performance go to the regions of light and joy or to the earth, or, if such be your intent and desire, go to the waters or reach into the herbs and trees there to stay in O Jataveda, that part of human personality which is unborn and eternal, i.e., the soul, pray purify and season to its original purity by the heat of your divine discipline. May your light and fire purify and shine it to its original lustre beyond the dross. And by those divine natural potentials of yours which are holy and blissful, pray lead this soul to noble states of life in the blessed regions of meritorious souls. 
4318 :O Jataveda, let all those flames of light with which you radiate and pervade the heavens, the firmament and all spaces, follow and abide by this dynamic immortal soul on its onward journey, and by other holy and blissful powers and disciplines, purify and season it to perfection. 
4319 :O Agni, form, shape out and release once again what, having been given to you, roams around with its own potential and identity so that, surviving, the soul may come to earthly parents and go round with its body and mind, wearing the vestments of life with new lustre and dignity. 
4320 :O soul, go forward by paths of divine law and rectitude to a life of day-night cycle, each being of twelve hour duration of colourful beauty, both children of dynamic energy, alert and on the move, lighted by the sun and moon, go past and come back to the auspicious enlightened parents who rejoice in the yajnic home with the lord of time and divine laws, Yama. 
4321 :O Yama, lord of time and laws of divine nature, those two, day and night, are your guardian sentinels of twelve hour duration each, all watching protective companions of humanity on way. O ruling lord of light, to their care entrust this soul. Let there be peace and well being for it all round, and bless it with good health and freedom from sin and ailment. 
4322 :Those two, night and day, are the most perceptive, abundant and alert, mighty strong and relentless watch dogs of Yama, lord of time and karmic dispensation, immediately close ahead and on the heels of people. Let them now, again, give us happiness and well-being full of bubbling energy so that we may see the light of the sun, giver of life and light. 
4323 :Soma flows for many and purifies, they chant the Samans. Many love ghrta and offer it to the yajna fire, they chant the Yajus. Honey flows for those who chant the Atharva verses, and knowledge for the lovers of Rks. The spirit of life flows for all of them, universally. O soul you too be with them. 
4324 :Those ancients and parental seniors who are committed to the eternal truth of law, who by nature and character are established in the self-sacrificing discipline of eternal law and yajna, and who are constant observers of divine law and performers of yajna, to those sages and seers, dedicated to austerity and relentless discipline and seasoned in divine yajnic duty and discipline, O soul, you too go and join. The spirit of life flows universally. 
4325 :Those who rise by tapas undaunted, those who by tapas rise to the heaven of bliss, and those who perform tapas of high order, to those, O soul, you too go and join, the spirit of life flows universally. 
4326 :Those brave who fight to the end in battles, who give up even their life of body for a cause, and those who give in charity a thousand ways, to those, O soul, you too go and join, the spirit of life flows universally. 
4327 :Poets, seers and sages of a thousandfold vision and virtue who adhere to the light of eternity at heart and the Rshis established in tapas, O soul on the sojourn of existence, to them you go and join, the spirit of life flows to all and through all, eternally. 
4328 :Mother Earth, be good and gracious, free from thorny want and suffering, wide and hospitable for this humanity, and provide us a home of peace, progress and happiness. 
4329 :O man, settle yourself on the open and equal plains of the vast and beautiful bosom of the earth, and while you live and do noble deeds worthy of your own potential, may they bring you showers of honey sweets. 
4330 :O man, I exhort your mind with all my heart and soul that you come and settle and enjoy yourself in this earthly home in the company of these people with your parents and seniors, in communion with Yama, lord of life and law of time, and may gentle breezes fan you to peace and freedom of joy. 
4331 :Let winds laden with vapour, rising from the oceans, raise you high up, soothing you to cool comfort of the soul and bless you with showers of rain. 
4332 :O man, I exhort you to live a full age of hundred years for life’s fulfilment, for good health, for karma and for knowledge, power and expertise for good action. Let your mind reach out to people, all your own, and then, having lived a full life, join with parental seniors and sages. 
4333 :Let nothing of your mind, pranas, limbs, body, or of the essence of your joy of being be lost or wasted here (in Grhastha). 
4334 :Let the tree of worldly jungle not obstruct you in your search for life, nor the vast divine and generous earth (in Vanaprastha). Having found your place among the parental protective seniors under the rules and discipline of Yama, the laws of life and time, go forward on your way. 
4335 :If some part of your body system has been wasted away, your prana and apana energies expended, by over-strain to exhaustion, let your parental seniors in residence together rejuvenate it bit by bit from consumption to recuperation like grass regrown from grass. 
4336 :Living ones have released him from the home and the inmates, Take him away from the village here. Death, messenger of Yama, lord of life and time, as universal warner and notifier has sent his life breath away to the sun rays. 
4337 :Those negative elements and personalities who live in the garb of close-knit relations, eat without offering anything for yajna but proudly roam around and join the company of our parental seniors, who bear heavy or smart figures and strain our children and grand children, all these, let Agni, leading light of life and knowledge, eliminate from our yajna and yajnic community. 
4338 :May our parental seniors, one with us, join our yajna here doing us good and promoting our life and health. And may we too, joining them with love and devotion, serving them with liberal hospitality, be able to live a full hundred years of life. 
4339 :O father figure, by the cow that I give you, and by the food cooked in milk that I offer you, pray be the sustainer and life giver with nourishment for the person who lacks the means of living, here. 
4340 :O man, win over the world of existence which is full of worldly attainments and thus satisfying. And thus with renewed energy, cross over the jungle infested with bear and boar. And whoever hurts you, thus free from fluctuations of pleasure and pain, deserves terrible punishment and forfeits all his share from life. 
4341 :Yama is far, very far indeed. Vivasvan, the sun, relatively, is close. Beyond Yama, I see nothing, nothing that I know. My yajna of love, devotion and non-violent self-sacrifice is established in Yama, and really it is the self-refulgent Yama who has spread the light of the sun also over the regions of the universe. 
4342 :Hiding the original immortal constant Prakrti by transforming it into the mutable for the mortal forms of existence, the evolutionary powers of Divinity, i.e., the creative and dynamic Prakrti with the immant will of divinity, offers this form of itself to the self-refulgent creator and master Vivasvan, Savita, and then that dynamic state as it is then, bears a twin pair of evolved existence, the Ashvins, and thus delivers the positive and negative complementarities of the evolutionary circuit of nature’s creative dynamics: Agni and Soma, energy and matter, prana and rayi (as the two are described from different points of view). 
4343 :Those who are deep in their knowledge, those who are highly self-developed, those who are tempered in the fire of experience and discipline, and those who are raised to high eminence, O Agni, high priest of yajna, invite and bring all these parental seniors and scholars to our yajna so that they may join and enjoy the yajnic delicacies. 
4344 :Those who are specialists of the science of heat and light, and those who are not specialists of heat and light but are specialists of other sciences, those who light the fire and those who do not, such as sanyasis, all those that rejoice in the light of knowledge with their own merit, all those, O Agni, if you know them and they know you, pray bring to yajna so that they may join the eassential splendour of the yajna and enjoy the sacred offerings in honour of the parental seniors. 
4345 :Agni, temper us for peace, do not heat to excess, do not mortify the body. O Agni, O sage, O scholar, O grhasthi, let your light and passion shine in the daily businesses of life, let it shine on earth, let it shine to alleviate the pain and suffering of life. 
4346 :I give this space and time to this seeker who has come here and has become my disciple, mine: So said Yama, lord omniscient, and continued that he may stay here and share the lord’s wealth and knowledge. 
4347 :This model and measure of life (in both quantity and quality) we work out (in the Vedic way) so that none other may have to do it any other way, and we work it out for a full hundred years, not less than that. 
4348 :This model and measure of life we project, none other might do so in any other way, for a full hundred years, no less. 
4349 :This model and measure of life, we plan to accomplish, none other might do so any other way, for a full hundred years, no less. 
4350 :This model and measure of life we define in all details, none other might do so any other way, for a full hundred years, no less. 
4351 :This model and measure of life, so defined, we plan and organise to fullness, none else might be able to do so any other way, for a full hundred years, no less. 
4352 :This model of life we live in full measure enthusiastically, so well that none other may do so any other way, for a full hundred years, no less. 
4353 :This model of life we live in full measure enthusiastically and thus exemplify and define for a full hundred years, not less, and we do so in such a manner that none may define it in any other way. 
4354 :I have lived and defined this model of life in full measure. I have fully realised happiness, a very paradise on earth. May I be blest with life and health more and even more. Let none have anything less or otherwise than this, not less than a full hundred years. 
4355 :Let pranic energy for inhalation, exhalation, systemic efficiency and good health for full age, and the eye for the vision of divine sun, be with you. And living thus, go by the simple and clear path free from crookedness to be with parental seniors and sages who abide by the laws of Yama, lord divine of life and law over time. 
4356 :Those pioneers of peace and enlightenment, who were free from the pitfalls of ordinary humanity, gave up hate and enmity and rose to the light of heaven, they all, shining with the light of divinity, attained to the top of the regions of bliss. 
4357 :This lowest region of the heaven of light is Dyau, full of water vapour, the middle region of heaven, Madhyama, is full of molecules, and the third and highest region of light is Pradyau where abide the blessed souls and the original creative pranic energies. 
4358 :To those senior souls who are our father’s parents and grand parents, those who sojourn in the vast skies, and those who live on earth and have reached the regions of light, to all these parental souls, we offer our homage of reverence. 
4359 :O man, soul born on earth, this now is your haven and home in life, no other. Being here, see the Sun in heaven. O Mother Earth, just as a mother covers her baby with the hem of her shawl, so pray cover this child with your motherly protection. 
4360 :O man, soul born on earth, this now is your haven and home, no other. In old age there is another from this home life of Grhastha. O Mother Earth, just as the wife covers her husband with her garment, so pray cover this child with your love and caress. 
4361 :O child born on earth, I protect you happily all round with the earthly vestments of mother nature. May all that what is in living beings be in me, and may all the essential power and potential that is in parents and Agni-Soma, passion and peace of nature’s divine energies, men and women, teachers and parents, who carve out simple and clear paths of life, bring auspicious jewels and create a beautiful environment on earth for noble souls in the world. You too, O man and wife, move by simple and clear paths further and join that divine process of lord creator which directs and brings auspicious nutriments for the growth and enlightenment of the rising generation. 
4362 :O man on the rising path of life, may the omniscient lord of life, protector of the world, Pusha, giver of nourishment, who promotes life and never destroys any living being, move you forward to advancement from here, and may Agni, lord and leader of advancement, hand you over to these parental, enlightened and gracious masters of the wealth of noble knowledge. 
4363 :O man on the forward journey of life, may good health and universal life energy protect and promote you all round. May Pusha, lord of universal growth and advancement, protect and promote you upfront on the way forward. And may self-refulgent Savita, lord of light and life’s inspiration, establish you there where men of noble action reach and abide in peace and joy. 
4364 :O man, I appoint and engage these two, Agni and Soma, mother and father, parent and teacher, prana and apana, as your guides, leaders and carriers in order to lead you to the house of Yama, lord of life and time, freedom and justice, so that you learn new knowledge and training in moral, social and spiritual discipline and join the assemblies in which you will have to take part later. 
4365 :This is your new attire, prime seat and abode now come to you. Give up that you wore before. And move on, knowing well, in accordance with your desired and contributive acts and policies, performed and yet to be performed, wherever you be in various roles among your people and others. 
4366 :Put on the armour of fire with lazer beams of Vedic voice, cover yourself with intense force and graces of plenty so that no ambitious adventurer, mad with passion for victory, may suddenly rise and try to shake you all around. 
4367 :Take away the power from the hands of the weak and the enervated along with their strength and splendour and the power to hear and adjudicate, and be here strong at the centre, and let us all, brave and well provided with the brave, win over our rivals and adversaries and achieve the goals of all battles of life. 
4368 :Taking over the power and defence forces from the possession of the dead along with the dominion, strength and splendour, taking over fully and appropriately the wealth and finance of the nation, well built, managed and preserved, come forward and move ahead with the people for the welfare of the living world. 
4369 :O man, this woman, having lost her husband, has chosen to live on the house-hold life of a married woman under the care of a husband and, in conformity with the ancient Dharma of house-hold and matrimony, she comes to you for succour and support. 
4370 :O man, accept her and provide her the life and wealth of the house-hold with the joy of progeny. 
4371 :Rise, O woman, toward the world of the living, leave the dead where you lie, come and join the state of conjugality with this man who offers to hold your hand as your second husband and life partner. 
4372 :I have seen the young woman, lover of life, being led away from the dead (husband) and getting married. When she was deeply sunk in darkness, I brought her back to the world of life from that former state of despair. 
4373 :O woman, you are inviolable, never to be hurt in any way. You know the ways and mores of the living world, and you follow the paths of the divinities. This man (who offered his hand in marriage to you) is now the protector of your person, mind and senses. He is your husband, love him, and with your love, rise and raise him to the heights of happiness in the world. 
4374 :O Agni, you pervade in the heaven of light, you vibrate in the reeds, and you flow in the currents of rivers. O Agni, you are the life and energy of waters too. 
4375 :O Agni, whatever you have burnt, bring back to fertility again. Let kyambu, shanda vyalkasha, soothing, beautiful and ornamental plants and grasses grow there. 
4376 :O man, this body with perceptions is one light of yours. Beyond this there is another light, that of the mind. Then there is the third light, that of clear and transparent Buddhi, intelligence with discrimination. With that third light join the presence of Divinity. And when you are joining that, with your causal body, go forward happy, darling of divinities, and reach and abide in the Supreme Presence and divine Bliss. 
4377 :qf|r q qcftcfc: fmryq qf^A' qsq^f i qq tA fqqDf: qfqqFT: q fTl% q^fqt q qtSJtfW: II 4 II Rise, O soul, move forward, go fast, find a home in the living waters in the mother’s womb, and then there in the parental home, one with mother, father and others, enjoy yourself with soma delicacies and gifts of love and affection. 
4378 :Move on and grow, develop and strengthen your body, let not your limbs weaken, let not your body weaken, fall down and forsake you. Wherever your mind is inclined, there go, wherever you wish and love to be on earth, there go. 
4379 :strengthen and exalt me to live happy and healthy till a full ripe old age. 
4380 :May Agni, light of life and fire of yajna, bless me with splendour. May Vishnu, divine spirit of omnipresent omniscience, bless me with genius and the divine Word in my mouth. May divinities of the world bless me with wealth, honour and excellence. And may the sacred waters along with the winds purify and sanctify me. 
4381 :May Mitra and Varuna, divine spirit of love and judgement, parents and teachers, hold, protect and promote me all round. May the Adityas, sun in the zodiacs and Aditya scholars of eloquence promote and exalt me. May Indra, spirit of divine omnipotence, and ruling powers, bring me lustre and splendour of action and achievement in hands, and may Savita, lord creator and inspirer of life, and the sun bless me with health and vitality to live a full life unto completion till old Man is the highest among mortals that dies, and the first that returns to this world of the living and goes forward. O men and women, offer homage with yajna and prayer to Yama, ruling lord of light and time and ordainer of the life and death of the transmigration of humanity. 
4382 :O Pitaras, parents, teachers and senior scholars, go to yajna and come back here again. This yajna, rich in honey sweets, is in your honour. Pray give us noble strength and power, auspicious wealth, honour and excellence, and brave children worthy of a noble community. 
4383 :Kanva, man of steady wisdom, Kakshivan, socially motivated administrator, Purumidha, man of prosperity dedicated to charity, Agastya, challenging destroyer of evil, Shyavashva, dynamic scholar, Sobhari, destroyer of want and suffering, Archanana, man of piety and prayer, Vishvamitra, universal friend, Jamadagni, harbinger of enlightenment, Atri, man of freedom from pain and suffering, Kashyapa, man of acute vision, and Vamadeva, lover of truth, beauty and goodness, may all these protect and promote us. 
4384 :O Vishvamitra, loving sage and the faculty of hearing, Jamadagni, visionary sage and the discriminating eye, Vasishtha, brilliant sage, pranic energy and peaceful settlement, Bharadvaja, mind and memory and abundance of food and energy, Gotama, master of the divine Word and highest efficiency of sense and mind, Vamadeva, worshipper and the spirit of the love of Satyam, Shivam, Sundaram, i.e., Truth, Goodness and Beauty, all noble sages and seers,, pitaras, protectors, promoters and sustainers, celebrated harbingers of discipline, pray bless us with peace and happiness. Indeed, with our prayers, homage and submissions, Attri, divine spirit of freedom from suffering, has stopped and eliminated our disintegration and maintained our integrity with holistic nature and character. 
4385 :Cleansed and self-shining through self- examination and self-control, we go forward over and across the world of evil, bearing life and culture ever renewed and elevated. Let us, then, live and move on rising higher with wealth and progeny, more and more refined and fragrant in our life and homes. 
4386 :They all, in happy homes, love and adore, refine, intensify, diversify, wholly integrate with culture and sweetness, and openly display their joint creative acts of yajnic development and progress and, themselves refined and purified at heart, receive and experience the joyous vision of divinity emerging and rising in the golden swell of the oceanic depths of their heart through these creative activities. 
4387 :O Pitaras, parental seniors, honoured and beatified by these achievements, join us with the gracious joy of your heart and accept the honour and adoration which is your rightful due. Progressive visionaries of the past, present and future, pray listen to our call and, thus invoked and invited, be generous benefactors for us all in our joint creative enterprise for progress and development. 
4388 :O Pitaras, parental seniors, who are Atris, free from the threefold suffering of body, mind and soul, Angirasas, vibrant scholars and scientists of energy, Navagva, innovative and progressive, Ishtavanta, experts in achieving what is valuable and desirable, Ratishacha, abundant in wealth, knowledge and positive generosity, thereby bearing noble gifts of creativity, sustaining the common human family and deserving deep gratitude, noble masters of holy action, pray come, join our yajna, be seated on this vedi and rejoice with us (in anticipation of still higher achievements). 
4389 :O Agni, harbinger of light and leader of humanity, as our forefathers, ancients and later, and our parental seniors, pure and sanctified, dedicated to truth and rectitude, refining, intensifying and expanding yajna, rising and shining, singing songs of divine praise, broke new grounds on the earth and discovered new lights of existence, so should we rise, march forward and shine. 
4390 :Brilliant people of noble action deeply committed to holy pursuits and aspiring to rise to the stars, tempering their life to purity in the crucibles of knowledge and experience as they refine gold and temper steel in the furnace, raising the flames of fire and exalting the nation, sitting and discussing in conferences, extend the bounds of terrific energy and knowledge of the earth and skies unto the birth of stars for us. 
4391 :As the master surveys and assesses the material wealth of his house and prosperity, as the commander assesses and declares the forces under his command, so do you, O lustrous ruler, watch and confirm the presence and continuance around you of noble and brilliant scholars and leaders. So do the people, like the rise of dawns, plan and prepare for the rise of the land like the producer master praying for the generous cloud and seeking for the health and age of life’s longevity. 
4392 :We act in service to you, O lord Agni, by which we can be called good performers. The brilliant dawns, wearing the mantle of light and truth, adorn the fire divine which is the sun. All that is good for humanity and the world, the divinities protect and promote, so that we, brave and blest with the brave, may celebrate your high glory profusely and ecstatically in our acts of yajnic piety. 
4393 :Indra, lord of winds and stormy heroes, may protect me from the eastern direction like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by the dynamic complementarities of nature’s divine forces in the cosmic circuit. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay here with us and partake of our holy offerings. 
4394 :May Dhata, lord sustainer of the universe, protect me from adversity from the southern direction like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by the dynamic complementarities of nature’s divine forces in the cosmic circuit. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay here with us and partake of our holy offerings. 
4395 :May Aditi, mother Infinity with Adityas, lazer beams of the sun in the zodiacs, protect me from the western direction like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by the dynamic complementarities of nature’s divine forces in the cosmic circuit. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay here with us and partake of our holy offerings. 
4396 :May Soma, lord creator and harbinger of peace and joy, with all divine powers of the world protect me from the northern direction like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by the dynamic complementarities of nature’s divine forces in the cosmic circuit. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4397 :May Dharta, supreme wielder of the universe, centre hold of all world’s diversity, hold you high as Savita, lord creator, holds the sun and heaven above. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4398 :In the eastern direction, in cosmic stability, I hold you, as ever before held in protected existence in your own identity in constant motion like the earth and heaven above ever moved in harmony by complementary natural forces of the cosmic cycle. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors, of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4399 :In the southern direction, in cosmic stability, I hold you as ever before in existence, protected in your own essential identity in constant motion like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by complementary natural forces of the cosmic cycle. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4400 :In the western direction, in cosmic stability, I hold you as ever before in existence, protected in your own essential identity in constant motion like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by complementary natural forces of the cosmic cycle. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4401 :In the northern direction, in cosmic stability, I hold you protected as ever before in existence, clad in your own essential identity, in constant motion like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by complementary natural forces of the cosmic cycle. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4402 :In the lower direction, in cosmic stability, I hold you protected as ever before in existence, clad in your own essential identity in constant motion like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by complementary natural forces of the cosmic cycle. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4403 :In the higher direction above, in cosmic stability, I place you protected as ever before in existence, clad in your own essential identity in constant motion like the earth and heaven above moved in harmony by complementary natural forces of the cosmic cycle. O divine performers of yajna, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our holy offerings. 
4404 :O lord, you are the sustainer of existence. You are the firm centre-hold of existence. You are the treasure-hold of all that is valuable and worth having. 
4405 :You are the treasure-hold, giver and purifier of the waters of life, you are the treasure-hold, giver and purifier of the honey sweets of life, you are the treasure- hold, giver and purifier of prana and pranic energies of life. 
4406 :O complementarities of life, nature and existence, men and women, heaven and earth, Prakrti and Purasha, mother and father, who move together in action like twins, pray save me from the sufferance of life here and there in the other beyond. Let the people dedicated to divinity serve you both together for prosperity and self-fulfilment. You know your own place in the world of existence, pray come and be seated there with us. 
4407 :Pray be present to our mind and vision in your seat in our heart. I join you with submission and homage of salutations and offer divine songs of ancient and eternal time in homage of adoration to you. This mighty song of adoration rises and reaches you by the straight and clear path of love and adoration, and may all the immortal souls of the world listen and rejoice in this song which shines bright as the sun. 
4408 :Man through meditation on Aum rises and covers three phases of the existential world and the corresponding three pervasive phases of Supreme Brahma, and moves on to the fourth, Turiya phase, the silent phase of Aum and transcendent phase of Brahma, through continued meditation in relentless discipline. Thus by Akshara, the Word, Aum, he realises the self- refulgent eternal Brahma and ultimately sanctifies himself absolutely at the very centre seed and origin of Rtam, constant existence beyond the mutable. 
4409 :(Reference for four phases of Aum and Brahma may be made to Mandukyopanishad, and to Chhandogyopanishad 1, 1-7 for meditative study of Aum). 
4410 :Brhaspati, lord of the expanding universe, chooses joyous death for the devas, people of enlightenment and piety. Does he not choose, provide for, freedom from death for his children? Brhaspati, all seeing visionary creator, laid out the provision and process for all, and thereby Yama, lord of life and law, releases all from the dear mortal body and supplants the mortal body with freedom of the soul. 
4411 :Leading light of life, Agni, harbinger of fresh life and energy, all pervasive, all knowing, invoked and adored, you receive the holy materials offered in yajnic oblations, convert and intensify them to fragrant refinement and catalytic efficacy and send them on to life nourishing divinities of nature and humanity. Let the pranic energies feed upon these offerings by their own nature and character and be replenished and energised, and you too, O refulgent divinity, consume your share in the natural process for life sustenance. 
4412 :O Pitaras, parental seniors and life giving natural powers of vital sustenance, abiding close by the flames of fire and morning rays of the dawn, pray bear and bring wealth, honour and excellence for the generous human performer of yajna. Bear and bring wealth peace and settlement in happiness for his children and bless them with food and energy for body, mind and soul in happy homes here. 
4413 :O Pitaras, parental seniors and divinities of nature’s pranic energies, leading lights of life and harbingers of love and advancement, performers of yajna and recipients of the gifts of fire and the dawns, pray come here, visit and be seated in every home, partake of the holy offerings here on the vedi, and bear and bring for us wealth, honour and excellence with progeny worthy of the brave. 
4414 :May our Pitaras, parental seniors, lovers of soma, peace and joy, invited with reverence to our yajnic programmes of prosperity in knowledge, joint action and valuable achievements, come here to our vedi, listen to us patiently and sympathetically, speak to us and advise us from their high position, and thus save, protect and advance us in life. 
4415 :Great and most brilliant, Vasishthas, are our Pitaras, parental seniors, parents and grand parents of our parents, lovers and creators of soma, peace, prosperity and joy, who come and join our soma-yajna. With those loving and enthusiastic pitaras, may Yama, lord ordainer of life and time, and the keeper of individual and social discipline, too, happy, loving and rejoicing with them all, we pray, come and partake of the delicacies of yajna as he pleases in every aspect of our yajna. 
4416 :Those who thirst for and strive after love of the divinities, who know the hymns and processes of yajna, who are shaped in mind and character by Vedic hymns and yajnic discipline with prayers and worship of divinities, and who are honoured a thousandfold by the divines, with such poets, sages and seers, O leading light of life, Agni, come, they are dedicated to truth and steeped in the science of yajna, heat and light. 
4417 :Those who are dedicated to the pursuit of truth, receive and consume holy offerings of yajnic inputs and develop, refine, protect and further promote the holy inputs, and move along with Indra, divine omnipotence and energies of nature at a velocity faster than anything else, with these generous performers and pioneers, sages and seers, and visionary creators ancient and modern steeped in the science of yajna, heat and light, O Agni, leading light of life and path maker of the future, come to us. 
4418 :O soul, go close to this seat of your existence, vast, auspicious and comfortable Mother Earth. And may this earth, silken soft for the man of generosity, nurse, nourish, protect and promote you forward on the path of life in the front direction. 
4419 :O Mother Earth, wax and bloom and swell for this soul, pray do not suppress it, be kind as mother for the child, pleasant for it to walk upon and move forward. O Mother Earth, cover him with your protection as a mother covers the child with the hem of her sari. 
4420 :Waxing and blooming, let the earth be stable and peaceful. Let a thousand homes and people abide at peace and observe measured ways of life. And let those homes, abundant in ghrta and prosperity, full of comfort and joy, be a happy haven for this man for all time. 
4421 :O man, I hold up, support and sustain this earth for you. Bearing this house of clay all around for you, let me never feel embarrassed (on your account). The Pitaras, parental seniors and natural energies, bear this central column firm, and there may Yama, ruler of time and law, build the house for you. 
4422 :(This mantra is highly and variously open ended: Who speaks the first sentence? Supreme Divinity. What is the house of clay? Could be the earth itself, could be the family home built over generations, could be the body itself built and given over successive births in the cycle of existence.) Agni, leading light of life, pray do not distort and vitiate this chamas, ladle of life’s yajna (full of exciting gifts for the fire of life). It is the darling of Devas and lovers of soma, those who create as well as enjoy the ecstasy of yajnic living. It is the ladle in which and from which the divinities receive the nectar of life. Let the immortal Devas here in this life rejoice in their acts of creativity and the consequent fruits. 
4423 :constancy, fills and provides for the vibrant, energetic and winsome soul is full, in which the lord provides the man’s share of potential food and joy for noble action, and therein flows the nectar of life constantly in the state of purity (unless it is polluted through ignorance or by one’s own negative choice). 
4424 :O soul, in the course of life, whatever fear, harm or injury, ignorance, or the dark ones, birds, beasts, insects or reptiles may do to your person, all these, may Agni, all purifying, and soma, and soma science known to experts, heal and restore, back to your good health. 
4425 :Let the herbs and trees be full of nectar. Let the nectar vested in me be full of its own divine purity through the life time. May the nectar which is the essence of the purity of life’s divine flow, with all the purity of nature’s constancy, purify me. 
4426 :And these women, noble wives happily married with their husbands, should anoint themselves with cream and collyrium, and let them, free from tears and sorrow, free from ill health, wearing jewels and ornaments, go forward in life as proud mothers in their home. 
4427 :O soul, join with pitrpranic energies and go forward, join with another life time for future existence and go forward, join with your acts of choice and obligation and go forward to the highest space. Having left the imperfect and exhausted life, go to a new home, join with another vigorous bright body full of fresh life again. 
4428 :parents, who have gone forward and entered into the wide space, for those forefathers of ours, the self- refulgent ordainer of the cycle of life and pranic energy creates new bodies always according to their inner desires recorded in the mind. 
4429 :Let the fog and mists be cool and comfortable to you. Let rain showers come cool and refreshing to you for peace. O cool and refreshing herbs and plants, O happy and delightful people in quality of mind and in response and vibrations, be calm, happy and comfortable in home life as a frog in cool comfortable water and calm this heat and fire of the mind and body. 
4430 :Let the self-refulgent lord of the world who is all-protective, giver of life energy, and all beneficent, grant us freedom from fear. Let all these brave heroes be many and for me, and may there be growth and progress in lands, cows and horses, and culture, and let there be great achievements of health and prosperity May the lord self-refulgent establish us in the nectar sweetness of immortality. Let death and adversity go off, let immortality come and bless us. May the lord protect these mature men against old age and infirmity. Let pranic energies protect these old people, and may their pranic energies never forsake them and fly to Yama, lord of time and death. 
4431 :O men and women, friends of the world of life, worship him, with homage of faith, love and havi, who is the creative visionary and wisest of the wise and parental powers of nature and humanity, and who, surely with his sole omnipotence, holds and sustains the stars and planets in space. May he, Yama, lord ordainer of life and time, sustain us too unto a long and full life of high quality beyond sorrow and suffering. 
4432 :O saintly seers of Vedic mantras, lovers, protectors and developers of the science of soma and the health and happiness of life, fear not, rise to the best and highest light of life, knowledge and bliss. This homage of faith and reverence is prepared and offered to you. Let us all rise and reach the highest light of bliss in the presence of Divinity. 
4433 :Self-refulgent Agni, light and fire of life, blazes and rises by topless banners of flame and, like a mighty mountainous cloud, roars over heaven and earth. Unto the ends of earth and heaven it assumes and reveals its presence in the semblance of stars and planets and waxes mighty and mightier at the heart of cosmic oceans. 
4434 :O Agni, saints and sages loving you with their heart and soul, realise and see you in meditation, flying like a bird of golden wings in the heaven of light and bliss, the messenger and harbinger of the oceanic waters of Varuna in space, and a blazing bird at the centre of Yama, sustaining omnipotence wielding and ordaining the world of cosmic existence with love and justice. 
4435 :Indra, bring us the divine vision, will and intelligence as does the father for his children. O lord universally invoked and worshipped, instruct us as a teacher at this modern time so that we, ordinary souls, may have the light of life and living experience of Divinity in the prevailing darkness. 
4436 :O lord, those generous and brilliant people, saints, sages and performers of yajna, bear, hold and offer jars full of rich delicacies for yajnic worship and hospitality to you, may those jars, we pray, be rich in their own essential yajnic wealth, honey sweets and abundance of ghrta. 
4437 :O man, whatever grains of rice mixed with sesamum seeds I sow, raise and give you according to the seasons, may they be abundantly sufficient and nourishing for you, and may Yama, master ordainer of time, health and age, approve for you. 
4438 :Vanaspate, lord of love, beauty and goodness, give us this love and dedication again which abides deep and safe at heart in you so that man may abide in the house of Yama, the world of justice and noble action, knowing, pursuing and also speaking of knowledge and karma to others. 
4439 :O Jataveda, leading light of life and the ways of life and action in active life, pray begin the process of teaching and discipline. Let your heat of discipline and light of knowledge be impressive and powerfully attractive. Pray heat up and temper the body and mind of this initiate and help him settle in the world of noble O man of knowledge and yajnic action, for all those parental seniors and ancestors of yours, ancient and later ones, who have gone before, let the streams of ghrta overflow abundant in a hundred ways of yajna in their honour. 
4440 :O man, mount and rise high on this life’s ladder, cleansing and raising yourself in knowledge, morals and yajnic action. Your own qualities of character and your own people here highly shine. Go forward and rise in their midst. Do not forsake the world of your parents and seniors which is of the first importance and value to you here. 
4441 :O jatavedas, intelligent men and women self- aware of all that is born, lives and completes its existential life cycle, arise, move forward by the paths shown by seniors and ancestral traditions and reach the universal mother spirit of existence. I help you all together and show the path to the ascent. Agni, leading light of life, receiver and carrier of your offerings, loved, invoked and adored, has accepted your offerings. O men and women dedicated to Divinity, O mother powers of divine nature, establish the performer of yajna in the state of earthly paradise created by people of noble action. 
4442 :Noble, generous and brilliant people of creative mind and the seasons in harmony design and structure the yajnic programmes, they prepare the yajnic inputs, the holy food, the ladles for offering and the entire infrastructure of yajna. With them, by their programmes, and by the paths shown by divinities of nature and humanity, the people who perform yajna rise to the state of peace and paradisal bliss on earth. O man, you too perform yajna and rise. 
4443 :O man, watch the path of nature’s divine law and yajnic performance by which Angirasas, vibrant leaders of science and holy action, go forward in life to the state of paradisal bliss. By those very paths of knowledge, law and yajna, you too go forward and reach the state of bliss where Adityas, brilliant sages of the highest order of knowledge and disciplined performance, feed on the honey sweets of bliss in the third and highest state of heaven. Go and be established there. 
4444 :Three ‘Birds’ of golden wing, that is, Ishvara, Jiva, and Prakrti, or heaven, firmament and the earth, or sun, moon and the earth, or Adityas, Angirasas and the yajnic people going by Devayana and Pitryana paths of living, and thunder and lightning of the rain bearer cloud, all these are sustained by the Lord Supreme on top of heaven over the middle regions. All these, by the laws of Rtam and yajnic performance, are ‘regions’, natural and human, replete with immortal nectar, leading to the state of joy and divine bliss. May all these bear and bring food and energy of body, mind and soul for the yajamana. 
4445 :Juhu, the ladle that holds the havi for the fire, the cosmic process of giving, sustains the high region of light. Upabhrt, the vessel that holds the havi for the Juhu, the process of nature that holds the wealth of abundance for release towards the process of offering, sustains the middle region of the firmament. And Dhruva, the fixed and settled container of havi, nature’s process of divine stability, sustains the earth. May all regions bright with the shine of ghrta, which lead to paradisal joy, bear and bring to the stable earth fulfilment of desire for the yajamana. 
4446 :(The cosmic process of sustenance is a circuitous balance of centrifugal and centripetal forces, the centre being the lord Supreme, dimensionless Infinity, smaller than the smallest, greater than the greatest. Reference may be made to Rgveda 1, 164, 35 and Atharva-veda 9, 10, 13-14, and to Kathopanishad 1, 2, 2O and Shvetashvataropanishad 3, 20, yajna thus is a symbol of the universe and the structure and process of yajna, a symbol of the structure and process of the universe.) Come, O Dhruva, divine stability of Nature, rise and rule the earth which provides food and sustenance to all forms of life. O Upabhrt, come, rise and take over the middle regions. O Juhu, rise and go to the heavenly regions of light along with the yajamana. 
4447 :O Yajamana, come up without hesitation and, with the ladle of ghrta which is the calf of Mother Nature, distil the milky wealth of all abundant directions of space. (The yajna thus is a symbol of cosmic economy which is boundlessly creative and infinitely beneficent.) Bold pioneers cross mighty seas with boats they design. They are mighty men of yajna, heroic doing and great achievement, and, by the ways they perform, others learn and they too cross the hurdles. And when the natural processes of divine evolution create the spaces and forms of existence, they assign a place of prominence to the yajamana in life. 
4448 :The original and primeval fire of cosmic yajna, Purvagni, is the love and ambition of Angirasas, vibrant scholars. Garhapatyagni, home fire of yajna, is the way of the Adityas, brilliant Brahmacharis settled as Grhasthis. And Dakshinagni, fire for pure being and creative generosity, is the way of generous people of knowledge, creative action and wide experience as on way to Vanaprastha. O man, grow whole, full and perfect, attain to the power and grandeur of Agni prescribed in the Veda, and realise the ultimate peace and freedom of life. 
4449 :peace and perfection from the front. Let Garhapatyagni shine and temper you to sobriety, peace and perfection from behind, and let Dakshinagni temper and sober you to peace, perfection and protective fearlessness from above, middle and the space on all sides from all directions. O Agni, leading light of life, pray protect him all round against the violence, cruelty, awe and terrors of existence. 
4450 :O saints and sages, O holy fire of yajna, with the expansive powers and persuasion of your knowledge and action, be like strong pioneers, leaders and guides of unbreakable strength and, with his physical, subtle and causal bodies, take the yajamana to the most happy and paradisal state of bliss and freedom where noble souls celebrate and enjoy themselves with the divinities. 
4451 :O Jataveda Agni, lord omnipresent and omniscient, leading light and fire of life, though One, you are three-way self-manifestive (As Agni on earth, as Vayu in the firmament, and as Aditya in the regions of light, as Vishva, Taijas and Prajna, as Virat, Hiranyagarbha and Ishvara, as Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesha, and as A, U, M of Aum). Pray heat, temper and shine this yajamana to peace, purity and sanctity from the back, from front, from above and from below (in meditation on Sushumna, in watchful perception upfront, in thought and intelligence in the brain and lower senses and emotions in the lowers regions), and thus secure him in the world of noble action and noble fruit with people of noble action and integrity. 
4452 :O Jatavedas, three-way manifestive and functional fires, i.e., Ahavaniya, Garhapatya and Dakshina fires, kindled and raised by the yajamana, start the new holy Prajapatya yajna of the wedded couple and bring peace and security into the home. Confirm the house-holder in the performance of social and spiritual obligations, and let the yajamana never suffer remiss, abuse or disrepute while you bless him with peace and prosperity. 
4453 :Prajapatya yajna, organised, expanded and elevated by the house-holder according to time and seasons, leads the yajamana towards paradisal regions of life and bliss. May the sacred fires love and favour that yajamana and accept his prajapatya yajna. And thereby, may the fires love and favour, temper and shine the yajamana and never allow him to be insulted, abused and disreputed. 
4454 :The yajamana dedicated to Prajapatya yajna raises the sacred fire in the vedi and rises by the flames of fire wishing to reach the light of heaven from the top of paradisal joy, and then for that man of pious action, from the depth of his clairvoyant mind, arises the light divine, jyotishmati, and the path to the light and bliss of Svah, Light Divine, worthy of divinities, shines bright and clear. 
4455 :O yajamana of Prajapatya yajna, let the man of enlightenment, like Agni, be the Hota, giver of oblations, let the scholar of holy speech and Veda, like Brhaspati, be the Adhvaryu, chief organiser, let the man of Vedic vision and power, like Indra, be the Brahma, the high priest on your right, and this yajna, the offerings made and the process properly completed, reaches there for you where there is the prime entry gate of the great performers and achievers. 
4456 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with milk and ghrta be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay here with us and partake of our offerings. 
4457 :with butter and curd be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay here with us and partake of our offerings. 
4458 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with butter and liquid curds be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay here with us and partake of our offerings. 
4459 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with ghrta and ghrta itself be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay here with us and partake of our offerings. 
4460 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with ghrta and cheese and fruit pulp be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our offerings. 
4461 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with butter and food and food grains be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our offerings. 
4462 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with butter and honey be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our offerings. 
4463 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with butter and delicious juice be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our offerings. 
4464 :Let the holy vessel full of delicacies prepared with butter and delicious waters and other liquids be here on the vedi. O divine performers of yajna for the divinities, benefactors of the world and path makers of humanity, we invoke and adore you who stay with us here and partake of our offerings. 
4465 :O yajamana, all those jars full of rich delicacies for yajnic worship and hospitality which generous and brilliant divinities hold, bear and offer to you may, we pray, be ever full, abundant in food, honey and ghrta. 
4466 :O yajamana, whatever rice mixed with sesamum I sow, raise and give for you may be full of nourishment, promotive and ever more and more abundant, and may Yama, master ordainer of time, health and age, approve and grant for you. 
4467 :May there be nothing wanting, may there be inexhaustible abundance, more and ever more, by the grace of Yama. 
4468 :That eternal, perfect and primordial divine presence and joy (Ananda) which pervades and blesses the earth, the heaven and the original cause of existence, Prakrti, the same joy which universally subsists with its origin, the Sole Creator, I adore with all my life breath, sense and mind, the seven priests, five pranas, mind and senses. 
4469 :Men of vision and discrimination who watch life and humanity have a vision of the eternal wealth of Divinity, omnipresent as Vayu, self-refulgent as Sun, and Infinite Bliss Itself, which bears all a thousand ways, and radiates and flows in a thousand streams into human consciousness. Those distill this sublime gift of Divinity, mother of seven worlds, Bhu, Bhuvah, Svah, Mahah, Janah, Tapah, Satyam, who always fill their consciousness with this presence and express it as a gift for others. 
4470 :People milk the treasure trove of life-giving milk for their well being all round: It is the Cow with four udders, giving life energy. It is Ida, Eternal Speech of Divinity with knowledge of Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. It is Aditi, Eternal Nature, indivisible, imperishable, indestructible. It is Energy Itself abiding in the highest space, rejoicing among people. O Agni, leading light of life and ruler of the earth, do not kill, do not even hurt the Cow, the Ida, the Aditi, the Energy. 
4471 :O man, this is your vestment, this body, this wear, this home, this earth, which Savita, lord creator and giver of life and light, the ruler and sustainer, gives you for your sustenance and well being. Wearing that vestment for self-fulfilment, live, move around and enjoy yourself in the dominion of Yama, lord ruler of time and the law of life. 
4472 :From this Aditi, Nature, the cows are born, of this, the calf was born, there is the rice grain, there is the sesamum grain. All sacred. Thus in the dominion of the Ruling Yama, man lives by that Aditi Cow, unhurt, undiminished, unexhausted, unpolluted mother source. 
4473 :Then, and thus, O man, these are your cows, let these be your givers of the fulfilment of desire : variegated, white, samely, different, with little calves having sesamum mole on the forehead. Let these be by you here in the home. 
4474 :Variegated, yellow, white, black, ruddy, those with little calves having sesamum moles on the forehead, bearing and yielding nourishing milk and energy for this man always without any disturbance, let these be by him without any break. 
4475 :I raise and offer this havi, sacred milk and the wealth of cows and their milky treasure of a hundred and thousandfold streams of energy and nourishment in the service of Vaishvanara, divine heat and vitality of the life of world humanity. This Vaishvanara, waxing and rising strong by the inputs of milk, protects and sustains our parents and grand parents and it protects and sustains our great grand parents. 
4476 :Parents, people, social organisations and government agencies, with their own inputs, serve, augment and benefit from the hundred and thousand- streamed, undiminishing and expanding milky spring of food and energy, undisturbed and steady in the midst of the green, plenteous world on the earth, among flowing waters. 
4477 :This kasambu, shining beaming liquid energy, distilled, developed and collected through natural process and human efforts, O friends and relatives, watch carefully and realise. Thereby, from here, the mortal man moves toward immortal joy through food and yajna. O kinsmen, build homes for that as far as you can for further development. 
4478 :O man, seeker of immortal wealth as you are, abide here in life, well aware of yourself and busy with noble yajnic action. Here itself grow from strength to higher strength, bearing and enjoying good health, ample wealth and long age, unhurt, unconquered by anyone. 
4479 :These honey sweet waters, milk, honey and water leading to noble action, pleasing, satisfying and energising children and grand children, giving immortal energy and fulfilment to parents and grand parents, may, we pray, bring total fulfilment and salvation to both parents and children, all past, present and future generatious - divine flow of energy and joy as they are. 
4480 :Let the people and their noble actions kindle, raise and set in continuous motion this holy fire of yajna for the honour and self-fulfilment of our parents and forefathers. May our parents and seniors join and approve of this yajna closely and happily. And may those parents and seniors who share and enjoy that food and energy created and presented to them bless us with wealth, honour and excellence and progeny worthy of the brave. 
4481 :People of piety and devotion light the fire which is the lover, receiver, carrier and disseminator of the havi offered into the vedi and thus worship the immortal Agni which knows and begets the hidden treasures, also those which were known to our forefathers now gone far away. 
4482 :What barley meal mixed and stirred with milk, what rice meal or cheese or fruit pulp I offer to you, may all those be full of energy, honey sweet and abundant in ghrta. 
4483 :O man, whatever rice mixed with sesamum I sow, raise and give for you may be full of nourishment, promotive and more and more abundant, and may Yama, master ordainer of time, health and age, approve and grant you the same in plenty. 
4484 :This is your path ancient and modem by which your ancient forefathers have gone, those that were pioneers as well as those who were admirers and followers of it. May they lead you too to the world of the noble performers of pious action. 
4485 :Lovers of Divinity invoke and adore Sarasvati, ever vibrant and flowing mother stream of knowledge from the Veda onward. They invoke and worship her in their expansive yajna of love and non-violence for the advancement of knowledge. Men of noble action invoke and adore Sarasvati for constant improvement and advancement of their skill and knowledge. May mother Sarasvati, we pray, give gifts of knowledge and expertise to the generous yajamana in the field of his choice. 
4486 :Pitaras, parental seniors, invoke and adore Sarasvati when they organise and accomplish Dakshina yajna for simple and natural gifts of skill, knowledge and expertise. O lovers of yajna and knowledge, come, sit on this vedi and enjoy, and spread the joy of learning all round. 
4487 :O Mother, bless us with pure, uncontaminated, nourishing gifts of food and energy for body, mind and soul. 
4488 :Mother Sarasvati, refulgent spirit of divine light and knowledge, who move with essential powers and cosmic hymns, rejoicing with veteran souls of creative vision on the same clairvoyant medium of imagination as they, like a goddess on chariot, pray bring and vest the yajamana here with his characteristic share of universal wealth, honour, excellence and living energy of infinite vision and inspiration flowing in a thousand streams of divinity. 
4489 :O vedi, I place and establish you on the earth, and may Dhata, generous and self-refulgent sustainer of the world, protect and promote our life. May the Supreme Lord Divine, farther than the farthest, be the treasure-hold and giver of wealth, honour and excellence for us so that the dead also may reincarnate and come to life again among the parents and live. 
4490 :Arise, O men and women, move forward, give up all that which the brilliant wise advise you should, and having left that, come both of you, sinless and inviolable, to this better way and, among parents and seniors, be sharers with me of the gifts and joy of the This gift of life and joy at the full has come to us from the noble treasure-hold, given by this divine giver. During the period of youth, maturity approaches people, slow but sure, which may, we pray, take them close to the parental seniors (in wisdom and vision). 
4491 :I bear and bring this holy seat for the parental seniors, this life itself made better and higher, which I spread as an open book for the divines on the vedi. O man, raising yourself and being thus sacred and revered, rise and occupy this holy position, and, in response, let the parents and seniors know and recognise you rising to the highest sanctity of your being. 
4492 :O man, self-raised and sanctified, you now occupy this holy seat. Let the parental seniors know and recognise you thus rising higher and higher. Fill in and accomplish your body and mind part by part completely. I order and sanctify the parts and systems of your personality with Vedic mantras and initiate you into higher life. 
4493 :Self-refulgent ruling lord of the universe is the ultimate treasure-hold of the sustenance and security of the regions of life (which is nothing short of the cosmic yajna). From there strength and energy, courage and lustre comes to us. May the lord bring us health and vitality for all living people for a long and healthy life of full hundred years. 
4494 :created this world of life, He that is pervasive and holds control over all life-giving food substances, Him alone, O friends of all the world, worship with offers of havi in yajnic oblations, and pray that He, Yama, lord of time, life and law, may bless us with higher and saviour food and energy for body, mind and soul so that we may live a long and full life of health and joy. 
4495 :As all five classes of people over the world join, form and found the house of Yama, lord of time, life and age, so do I found the house for the family so that there may be plenty and prosperity for us. 
4496 :Bear this golden gift of life as your father bore it before. Thereby you would glorify the right hand expertise and performance of your father leading to paradisal bliss. 
4497 :All those people who are living, who are dead, who are born and who are worthy of homage and company, for all of them, I pray, the stream of ghrta, abundant and overflowing with honey, may run incessantly. 
4498 :Lord Almighty, giver of showers of the wealth and knowledge of existence, all watching guard and protector, light of the days, augmentor of the light of dawns and heavens, life energy of flowing floods, makes the clouds roar and, having entered the heart core of the soul with the light of intelligence and awareness, vibrates, sanctifies and volubly enlivens the five koshas of the soul. 
4499 :O lord all pervasive, your divine refulgence, vibrant fragrance, pure and powerful, pervading extensively over the heavens may, we pray, cover and protect us as an umbrella. Like the sun, with light and grace, O lord purifier and sanctifier, you shine and bless. 
4500 :Indu, the human soul which is enlightened, goes forward and rises to attain to the light of the grace of Indra. Neither the soul nor Indra violates the covenant of love between the human and the divine as a friend never violates the love and trust with another friend. Just as a man abides faithfully by the love of his beloved, so do you, O Soma, lord of peace and inspiration, proceed and emerge in the heart core of the devotee in a hundred ways. 
4501 :Vibrant sages and enlightened seniors have come, they enjoy themselves, they inspire and enlighten us, their dear ones. They approve and appreciate our courtesy, reverence and hospitality. We, most youthful and enthusiastic citizens, invite and adore them. 
4502 :O parental seniors and sages, lovers of peace dedicated to soma and divine inspiration, come by the serious and awesome paths carved out by forefathers. Bear and bring us good health and full age, wealth, honour and excellence, bless us and our children and help us with progress and prosperity. 
4503 :O parental seniors and sages, pitaras, lovers of peace and soma of good cheer, go far by great and awesome paths and highways leading to cities and citadels, and then at the end of the month come again and visit our homes to partake of our hospitality and meet your noble people and their progeny, your own, worthy of the brave. 
4504 :O pitaras, if Jataveda Agni, leading light of life and duty, while leading you to the stage of retirement, i.e., Vanaprastha or Sanyasa, left over some part of your obligations towards the seniors and sages, unaccomplished, I would complete and fulfil those for you so that you be happy at peace at your full and best in that state of life leading you to heavenly joy. 
4505 :Jataveda Agni, that is, the Ahavaniya, Garhapatya and Dakshinagni, yajnic fires of the householder, are a messenger, an agent on natural and divine duty, and this yajnic fire is sacred, worthy of adoration and service every morning and evening by the householders. O Jataveda Agni, sacred messenger, take to the pitaras the homage offered, let them share and consume it as their own rightful share, and you too have and consume your share of the offerings, O divine and refulgent fire. 
4506 :O father figure, let your mind be here at peace in the hermitage. O mother land, just as women of the home wrap a dear child in soft clothes, you too keep this hermit here and cover him with protection and sustenance and provide a soft and comfortable Let the hermitages for the residence of parental seniors and sages be bright and beautiful places. O father figure, I honour your Reverence in this beautiful hermitage with all the comfort and care you need. 
4507 :All those our father figures, seniors and sages who are among us, here is the seat and sustenance for them. 
4508 :O Varuna, lord of freedom and justice, loosen and untie our chains of bondage of the highest, medium and lowest order and let them drop from us. And then, O Aditya, lord of refulgent majesty, we shall be free from sin and crime, and, dedicated to your law and discipline, we shall be all for the service of mother Aditi, the lord’s inviolable creation and Nature’s law. 
4509 :O Varuna, remove and shed away all chains of bondage from us, chains by which the soul is tied in space and time, by laws made by man and laws of cosmic justice. And then, O lord self-refulgent, preserved, protected and promoted by you, we would live happy for a full hundred years. 
4510 :Homage and food for Agni, leading light of life and inspirer of reason, imagination and vision. 
4511 :Homage,food and best wishes, for the man blest and dedicated to father, mother and the sagely seniors. 
4512 :Homage, food and reverence, to parents, forefathers and seniors refulgent in peace and soma joy of life. 
4513 :Homage, food and reverence, to Yama, man of law and justice dedicated to parents and seniors. 
4514 :Homage of food and reverence, is here, O great grandfather, to you and yours with you. 
4515 :Here is homage of food and reverence, O grandfather, to you and yours with you. 
4516 :Homage of food and reverence, to parents and parental seniors on earth. 
4517 :Homage of food and reverence, to parents and parental veterans, sojourners of the skies and intermediate space. 
4518 :parental veterans, sojourners of the light of heaven and the solar system. 
4519 :Homage and salutations to you, parents and parental seniors, for energy. Homage to you, parents and parental seniors, for the beauty, pleasure and flavour of life. 
4520 :Homage and salutations to you, for blazing grandeur, homage and salutations to you, pitaras, for fiery passion. 
4521 :Homage to you, O Pitaras, for all that was awesome about you, for all that was terrible and sublime. 
4522 :Homage to you, O Pitaras, for all that is gracious and blissful about you, for all that is beautiful and Homage to you, O Pitaras, sustainers of life. Food and reverence to you for replenishment, O pranic powers. 
4523 :All those pitaras that are and have been here on earth, and all of you, pitaras that are here right now, may they, be in harmony with you, and may you all be in harmony with them, and the best of them, and stay so too. 
4524 :All those pitaras that are and have been here on earth, and all of us alive here right now, may they be in harmony with us, and may we be in harmony with them, and the best of them, and stay so too. 
4525 :O light and fire divine of cosmic yajna, may we kindle and raise you here on earth and in the heart, bright, radiant, unaging and generous. And may that admirable fuel fire of yours, wondrous more and ever more, that shines and blazes in heaven as the sun, bring us food, energy and enlightenment to the celebrants. 
4526 :The moon, celestial bird of golden wings, flies in the midst of spatial waters in the light of heaven. O lights and lightnings of heaven, O worlds of golden rings revolving in Infinite Divinity, mortals reach not the bounds of the Boundless. Let heaven and earth know of this, know this of me. 
4527 :May the rivers flow together in unison, may the winds blow together in unison, may the birds fly together in unison. O songs of divinity, extend and elevate this yajna of togetherness and unity. I offer oblations with the fragrant havi of the unity of diversity-in-unison. 
4528 :O oblations of yajnic havi, preserve, protect and promote this yajna of unity, and, O united dynamics of nature and society, protect and promote this yajna of togetherness. O songs of divinity, extend and elevate this yajna of togetherness and unity. I offer oblations with the fragrant havi of the unity of diversity-in-unison. 
4529 :Form by form, class by class, having begun by individuals with love, I embrace this unity of the immense variety. May all four directions of space extend and elevate this yajna of togetherness and unity. I offer oblations of my contribution with the fragrant havi of the unity of diversity-in-unison of all life. 
4530 :O man, may the streams flowing from snowy mountains be for your peace and pleasure. May the wells and lakes and tanks bring you peace and joy. May the rivers flowing fast be full of peace for you. And may the showers of rain bring you peace and joy. 
4531 :May the desert waters be peaceful to you. May the waters of abundant regions bring you peace. May the waters of wells and tanks dug out bring you peace. 
4532 :And may the waters brought in jars bring you peace and well being. 
4533 :Waters naturally running deep, but not in channels dug up artificially with tools, are waters medically more efficacious than even the doctor’s sanatives, thus do we experienced physicians say. 
4534 :On being washed and cleaned by divine waters of rain, waters of running streams, you would become as strong and swift as war horses. 
4535 :Waters are givers of peace and well being. Waters are the cure against disease. Just as waters are satisfying to the needy, so are they to you. Take on to waters efficacious as medicine. 
4536 :From the solar regions (as light), from the earth (as magnetic energy), from the sky (as wind and electric energy), from the herbs and trees (as food and vital energy), and from medicinal herbs, wherever Agni energy is present, is studied, valued and developed, let fire energy, our friend and companion of love and value, come to us. 
4537 :O Agni, vital heat energy all pervasive, whatever your power, grandeur and efficacy in waters, in forests, in herbs, in animals, and in the living energy of pranas, come and bless us with those powers and efficacies, giver of wealth, unaging divinity. 
4538 :O Agni, fire divine, whatever your power, grandeur and efficacy present in divinities, leading to peace and joy, whatever your energy and power present in parental powers and pranas, whatever your vitality and power that vibrates and grows in humans, with all that, pray bless us with health, wealth, honour and excellence. 
4539 :O Agni, leading light of life, with words of prayer and adoration I come to you and ask for the gift of your generosity so that I may reach the lord divine, the poetic visionary worth knowing who listens to the seeker. Pray cast off the displeasure of divinities from us so that we may be free from the causes of fear and live fearless at peace. 
4540 :The first oblation into the creative yajna, i.e., thought and intention, which Atharva, the unmoved mover, Jataveda, self-manifested into self-awareness, made, and the first fragrance that arose and produced further creative materials of creation, that very first oblation of thought and intention, I too make, O leading light of creation, Agni, and I pray that, thereby adored and moved, lead my self-creative yajna and carry my offerings to the first and ultimate yajamana. 
4541 :I place and honour Akuti, Sankalpa Shakti, or thought and intention, first and foremost of all creative process. Glorious companion of the dawn of creation, it is the mother of mind and memory, and, I pray, it may readily inspire me at will. In whatever direction I move with full concentration, let it be mine exclusively, without distraction, and I may too value and honour it as it arises in the mind. 
4542 :O Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe and infinite intelligence, come and bless us with intelligence and will, close at hand with thought and determination. And give us plenty of honour and prosperity, and pray be responsive at the call of our invocation and adoration. 
4543 :May Brhaspati, lord of Infinity immanent in the mind and senses, know and recognise my thought and intention, acknowledge my words of thought and intention and respond favourably. May the lord, to whom the mind and senses are obedient in unison and well guided, and they grow divine thereby, approve our desires and ambitions and grant us fulfilment. 
4544 :Indra is the self-refulgent ruler of the moving world and dynamic humanity, the lord that pervades infinite forms of existence over the earth. Thereby he gives prosperity of wealth for the generous yajamana and, invoked and adored, inspires and accomplishes many possibilities of achievement directly. 
4545 :Purusha, the cosmic soul of existence, is Divinity Personified, of infinite hands, infinite eyes and infinite feet. It pervades the universe wholly and entirely, and having pervaded and comprehended the universe of ten natural constituents, it transcends the universe. 
4546 :By three steps of evolutionary existence the Purusha ascends to the heavens (over earth and the firmament), while its presence manifests again and again in the world of existence (with each creation), pervading all the material and biological world. 
4547 :So great are the grandeur and glories of It, and yet the Purasha is greater than all that. The entire worlds of existence are but one fourth of It. Three parts of Its mystery are in the transcendental heaven of immortality beyond the universe. 
4548 :All this that is and was and shall be is Purasha, ultimately, sovereign over immortality and bliss, who also abides by the other that is mortal and other than bliss, i.e., the suffering and sorrow of evil and ignorance. 
4549 :How do the visionary sages visualise the self- manifestive modes of Purasha in the world of existence? What is Its mouth? What the arms? What the thighs? Brahmana, (man of knowledge, divine vision and the Vedic Word in the human community) is the mouth of the Samrat Purusha. Kshatriya, man of justice and polity, is the arms of defence and organisation. The middle part is the Vaishya who produces and provides food and energy. And the ancillary services that provide sustenance and support with auxiliary labour are the feet, the Shudra that bears the burden of society. 
4550 :The moon is bom of the cosmic mind, the sun is born of the eye, fire and energy are bom of the mouth, and the wind is bom of the breath. 
4551 :heaven is from the head, the earth comes from the feet, and directions of space from the ear. Thus did the sages visualise the worlds of existence as Purusha, and the Purusha as the universe, a living, breathing, organismic, self-sustaining, self-organising sovereign system. 
4552 :First arose Virat, the cosmic Idea, the blue-print in terms of Prakrti, the one, and diverse of forms, the existential Purusha. The Purusha, cosmic soul, manifests in the Virat and abides sovereign in and over it. Though manifested, It exceeds, transcends, and then creates the universe and the world regions for forms of existence. 
4553 :When the Devas, natural forms enacted and brilliant sages visualised the cosmic yajna of creation, then the spring season was the ghrta, summer, the fuel, and winter was the havi. (This natural and meditative enactment is in terms of nature’s evolution. Prakrti, with the divine presence and immanent will, evolves into material, biological and psychic forms.) The Rshis of universal vision invoke and worship the Purusha, self-manifested in advance of everything else, with profuse showers of love and devotion. And by virtue of the presence, immanent in Prakrti, of the Purusha, the natural forces of Sadhya pranas and Vasu abodes of life carry on the yajna of evolution, and the divine sages too continue to visualise the yajna and the worship. 
4554 :From that yajna enacted by Nature with the immanent will were born the horses and those which have two rows of teeth up and down. From that were bom the cows, and from that were born the goat and the sheep. 
4555 :From that yajna of cosmic dimensions initiated by Purusha and from His will and voice were born the Rks and the Samans. From that were born the Chhandas, i.e., the Atharva-veda and the Yajus. 
4556 :From that cosmic yajna with total input of Prakrti and the immanent will of Purusha was prepared and received the sacred ghrta, living liquids of life forms. That yajna and yajamana created all the animals, birds of the air, animals of the forest and those of the village for domestic use. 
4557 :Seven are the bounds of the vedi of cosmic yajna, thrice seven, twenty-one, are the samidhas, fuel sticks, ordained and offered into the yajna fire. This is what they see when the sages enact the yajna within and concentrate on the Purusha, the universal observer whose presence they crystallise and fix upon in the soul for direct realisation. 
4558 :Note: Seven bounds of the vedi are the seven chhandas or metrical compositions of the Veda. Twenty one samidhas are: Prakrti or potential material cause of the universe, Mahat or material cause actualised, Ahankara or individualised identity of the universe as the blue-print, five subtle elements, five gross elements, five senses and three qualitative orders of Prakrti, i.e., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. 
4559 :Seven times seventy are the rays of the self- refulgent radiance of the sun on top bom of the self- manifested Purusha, and so are the rays of the moon, light of the night, and so are the inspiring energies of soma, king of life-giving herbs. 
4560 :Wondrous, various and glorious are the stars shining and moving together in orbit in the heavenly region of the universe. Loving the auspicious revealing music of motion and seeking noble understanding of the mystery, I dedicate myself day and night with words of faith and commitment to the vault of heaven. 
4561 :O leading light of life and the universe, Agni, let Krttika and Rohini stars be responsive to my study and invocation. Let Mrgashira be auspicious. Let Ardra bring me peace and well being. Let Punarvasu bring me words of truth. Let Pushya be good and auspicious. Let Ashlesha give me light. Let Magha give me movement and a new opening. 
4562 :Let Purvaphalguni and Uttaraphalguni be auspicious. Let Hasta, Chitra and Svati be full of peace and joy for me. Let Vishakha be responsive to my attention and bring me success. Let Jyeshtha be auspicious, and Mula be free from trouble. 
4563 :Let Purva Ashadha bring me food. Let bright and generous Uttara Ashadha bring me energy. Let Abhijit give me merit and virtue. And let Shravana and Shravishtha bring me good health and noble strength. 
4564 :Let the great Shatabhishaj bring me wealth and goodness of high order. Let the two Proshthapadas bring me holy peace and comfort. Let Revati and both Ashvayuks bring me honour and prosperity. And let the Bharanis bring me the wealth and excellence of life. 
4565 :May all the stars, the constellations, which are in heaven, in the middle regions, visible over the seas, on earth, on mountains, in directions of space, whose position in relation to the earth, the moon determines as it revolves in its earthly orbit, may all these in their position be auspicious harbingers of peace and good fortune to me. 
4566 :May the twenty-eight nakshatras be auspicious harbingers of peace and help me advance with higher achievement more and more. Let me achieve more and more, let me protect and preserve what I achieve, and as I preserve and build, let me achieve much more and still more. And thus I offer homage and salutations to the Lord Supreme by day and by night. 
4567 :Peaceable sunset, inspiring morning, soothing evening, bright day, beautiful animal world, elevating flights of birds, everything, I pray, be good and expansive for me. O leading light of life, Agni, having given me ready response to my invocation and adoration with well-being and immortality, pray come again as harbinger of joy and celebration. 
4568 :O Savita, lord of life and giver of light, ward off detraction, scandal mongering, reproach, hate, all these negativities toward others, like empty pitchers (full of garbage). 
4569 :Let us avoid sin and evil and reject polluted food, let us eat only holy food. O sinner, let the moon of the path of virtue wash away your evil smelling nose and turn it to good. 
4570 :f*rT m ^^juij-uh pci n'tJIci f h fr’rr i TOfl^TfR-* rTT: W R>l eld'll f^PsT II ^ II O Brahmanaspati, all these winds that blow around counter to each other and to me, O Lord Omnipotent, pray turn them all harmonious and make them auspicious to me. 
4571 :Let there be happiness and well-being for us all round. Let there be no fear around us. O Brahmanaspati, homage and salutations to you by day and by night! May heaven be full of peace for us. May peace prevail upon the earth for us. May this vast sky be full of peace for us. May the abundant streams of water be for our peace and plenty, and may the herbs and trees bring us peace and good health. 
4572 :May our former ways of life and forms of action bring us peace. May what we have done and what we have not done be for our peace. May our past and our future be for our peace. And may all be peace, full of peace, for our peace and our well-being. 
4573 :May this Divine Word of the Veda which is revealed and exalted by Brahma, which is immanent and transcendent with Supreme immanent and transcendent Lord Brahma, by which alone most awful and sublime things can be known and done, bring us peace. By that same Divine Word may all be full of peace for us. 
4574 :May this supreme mind of yours, O men and women both, which is energised and exalted by Brahma, Lord Supreme, by which most awful things can be done and achieved, bring us peace. By that same mind may all be full of peace for us. 
4575 :These five senses which, with the mind, are six, which in my heart are energised and exalted by Brahma, Lord Supreme, with which most awful things can be done and achieved, may bring us peace. With those senses and mind, may all be full of peace for us. 
4576 :May Mitra, lord of divine love and friendship, be all peace for us. May Varuna, lord of divine judgement and protection, be all peace for us. May Vishnu, lord omnipresent, be all peace for us. May Prajapati, lord sustainer of his children of creation, be all peace for us. May Indra, lord omnipotent, and Brhaspati, lord of Infinity, be all peace for us. And may Aryama, lord of cosmic law, justice and guidance, be all peace for us. 
4577 :Let the day be all peace for us, the night all peace, the sun, destroyer of darkness, all peace, the death, harbinger of the end, all peace. Let all incidents and accidents on the earth and in the sky, all planets and satellites moving in space be all peace us. 
4578 :Let the earthquakes be peaceable, not destructive, for us. Let the falling meteor and whatever is hit be peaceable, not destructive. Let the moving objects with a trail of red and white be peaceable, and let the land-slides be peaceable, not destructive. 
4579 :Let the planet hit by meteor be at peace for us. Let mutual conflict be resolved to peace for us. Let acts of violence and destruction be at peace. Let land mines, sieges, missiles and national disturbances be silenced into peace for us. 
4580 :Let lunar eclipses and solar eclipses in all phases be at peace, free from evil shadow. Let the deadly meteor and the falling star be peaceable for us, and let the wind storms with terrible shears be at peace for us. 
4581 :May Rudras, scholars of the middle order, Vasus, scholars of the basic order, and Adityas, scholars of the highest brilliant order, leading lights of the nation, and flames of yajna fire bring peace for us. May the great seers and sages, generous people, brilliant eminences, and Brhaspati, sagely scholar of the Veda, all bring us peace. 
4582 :Brahma, Lord Supreme and his Word of the Veda, Prajapati, father sustainer of the children of his creation, Dhata, lord ordainer, regions of the world, the Vedas and specialised branches of the general Vedic lore, seven sages who know the seven chhandas and all sciences of yajnic fires, by all these has been created and determined my path of life and action. May Indra give me peace. May Brahma give me peace. May all divinities of nature and divinities of humanity bring me peace. May all the divinities, brilliancies and eminences of the world give me peace and peaceful settlement. 
4583 :Whatever the methods and sources of peace and peaceful settlement that possibly exist in the world and which the seven sages of the Veda know, may they all be the very haven and home of peace for me may all be peace for me, may all be freedom from fear for me. 
4584 :May earth be at peace, firmament be at peace, heaven be at peace, waters, oceans and spatial vapours be at peace, herbs be at peace, trees be at peace, all divinities of the world be at peace, for me. May all divinities of nature and humanity bring me peace, peace and peace, with all forms and shades of peace in every phase of life, society and the environment. With all those forms of peace, all those modes and methods and sources of peace, let us all attain peace, let me be at peace. Whatever is awful here, whatever is cruel here, whatever is sin and sinful here, let all that be at peace, be good and beneficial, let all and everything be at peace, peaceful, and peaceable for us here in the world for all. 
4585 :May Indra, ruler omnipotent, and Agni, leading light of omniscience and wisdom, bring us peace with all modes and methods of protection. May Indra and Varuna, givers of food and energy with plenty of yajnic materials, bring us peace and settlement. May Indra and Soma, lord of peace, health and vitality, bring us peace for happiness and well being with freedom from suffering and fear. May Indra and Pusha, cosmic spirit of nourishment and growth, bring us peace for food, energy and victory in life. 
4586 :May Bhaga, power and prosperity, bring us peace. May our praises and appreciations prevailing around be for peace. May our organisational wisdom and performance bring us peace. May our wealth and honour and excellence be for our peace. Let our praises and appreciations of truth and noble conduct be for our peace. And may Aryama, law, justice and the rule of law, ever alert and awake, bring us peace and well-being. 
4587 :bhavatu svadhabhih. Sam rodasi brhati sam no adrih sam no devanam suhavani santu. 
4588 :May Dhata, cosmic sustainer, bring us peace. May Dharta, sustainer of stars and planets, bring us peace. May the vast mother earth and nature with all her powers and forces bring us peace. May the cloud and the mountain bring us peace. And may our invocations, oblations in yajna and the divine responses bring us peace and well-being. 
4589 :May Agni with noble fires and flames be harbinger of peace and well-being for us. May Mitra, Varuna, and the Ashvins, day and night, and the sun and moon, bring us peace. May the noble actions of the noble doers bring us peace and well being. And may the blowing winds bring us peace and well being. 
4590 :May the heaven and earth ever invoked and adored bring us peace. May the firmament be full of peace for our appreciation of the beauty of the lights of stars. May the herbs and trees and the grandeur of forest abodes be for our peace. And may the victor sustainer of space and spatial particles be for our peace and wellbeing. 
4591 :May Indra, self-refulgent generous sun, with the Vasus, abodes of life sustenance, be for our peace. May Varuna, adorable cosmic waters, with rays of the sun in the zodiacs, be full of peace for us. May Rudra, cosmic life force, saviour from suffering, with its pranic energies, be for our peace and well being. May Tvashta, formative power of the cosmic soul, with its fiery vitalities be for our peace and well being and be responsive to our invocation and adoration here. 
4592 :May Soma, cosmic spirit of peace and joy be for our peace and well being. May Brahma, lord supreme and the Vedic lore be for our peace and spiritual sustenance. May the yajnic scholar scientist be for our peace and well being. May our yajnas, developmental programmes, be for our peace and well-being. May the heights and expansions of our yajnic columns and flag posts be for our peaceful progress. And may our organic and organismic productive programmes and our yajna vedi be for our peace and prosperity. 
4593 :May the sun of expansive radiance rise for our peace and joy. May all the four quarters of space be full of peace for us. May the firm and fixed mountains be full of peace for us. And may the waters of running streams and rivers and the rolling seas be full of peace. 
4594 :May mother Infinity, nature of life giving Vedic lore bring us peace and well being with the vows of sacred discipline. May the winds nobly vibrant and adorable blow for our peace and progress. May Vishnu, lord of green herbs, and Pusha, natures nourishment and growth be for our peace and total good. 
4595 :May the saviour of life giver Savita, self- refulgent sivine Sun, bless us with peace. May the radiant dawns bring us peace. May the cloud of showers be peaceful and inspiring to the people. And the master farmer of the field, harbinger of security and peace, bring us peace and prosparity. 
4596 :May the noble people dedicated to truth and the defence of truth be for our peace and righteousness. May the horses be for peace. May the cows be for peace. May the expert artists, skilful artisans, expert technologists, be for our peace. May our parents and parental seniors be kind and blissful in yajnas for our peace in our struggles for progress. 
4597 :saha dhibhirastu. Samabhisacah samu ratisacah sam no divydh pdrthivdh sam no apydh. 
4598 :May the generous and brilliant divines of the world be for our peace. May Sarasvati, divine Mother Knowledge, with her message of enlightenment for our intelligence and will be for peace. May all generous, cooperative and abundant powers of nature and humanity be for peace. May the waters of the earth and heavenly firmament be full of peace and good health for us. 
4599 :Sam no aja ekapaddevo astu samahirbudhnyah sam samudrah. Sam no apdm napdtperurastu sam nah prsnirbhavatu devagopa. 
4600 :May the eternal and unborn lord refulgent of his own absolute power be for our peace and well being. May the cloud of the sky be for our peace and well being. May the sea be for our peace and good. May the light and lightning born of and sustainer of the showers of water be for our peace. And may the earth, darling of divine forces, be for our peace and well being. 
4601 :May the Aditya scholars of the highest order, Rudra scholars of the middle order, and Vasus of the basic order appreciate this latest song of homage being composed and offered to Divinity. May all revered and adorable sages and scholars of heavenly and earthly sciences arisen from the sacred Vedic voice, pray, listen to us and appreciate. 
4602 :Those of the brilliant scholars and sages who are specialised in the science of yajna according to the seasons, adorable, meditative at the mental level, dedicated to immortality beyond mortal involvements, knowers of the laws of divine truth and law, may, we pray, lead us to the divine path and help us realise the Supreme Reality worthy of worship. O saints and scholars, pray protect, promote and refine us with the modes and methods of self-fulfilling sciences of peace and common well-being. 
4603 :O Mitra, divine spirit of love and friendship, O Varuna, divine spirit of justice and wisdom, saviour from suffering, O Agni, leading light of life, may that auspicious peace be with us, for us. May this auspicious freedom from fear and suffering be with us, for us. May we achieve that depth and seriousness, that unshakable stability of life. Salutations to you, Lord of Heaven and Infinity, for peace and security in a happy home. 
4604 :Usha, the dawn of light, removes the darkness of her sister night and opens up the path of day light by its noble rise every morning through the day-night succession. By this continuous rise of the dawn every morning, let us achieve food, energy and victory brought in by Divinity and enjoy life for a full hundred years with our youthful generations worthy of the brave. 
4605 :These two arms of the forces of Indra, mighty ruler and supreme commander, both strong and stable, varied and wonderful, virile and creative, saviour and victorious, I, the first in rank, command and deploy whenever the occasion arises. By these two arms of the forces, the power, pleasure and privilege of the uncreative and destructive forces is defeated and won over. 
4606 :Instant attacker, penetrating advancer, terrible as a bull, relentless striker, creator of panic among enemies, paralysing challenger, winkless vigilant, sole hero without a match, Indra conquers a hunred hosts together. 
4607 :O men at arms in battle, challenge, fight and win over the enemy by the force of Indra, the challenger, relentless conqueror, undauntable, unshakable, terrible warrior who bears the arrow in hand and shoots. 
4608 :Indra is the warrior with bows and arrows in hand, and, with joint armed forces, conquers multiple enemy hosts and wins over concentrated forces. Protector and promoter of soma peace and joy of life, strong of arms wielding a terrible bow, he throws out the enemies with the shots of his unfailing arrows. 
4609 :Indra, tactical organizer of deployable forces, venerable, strong, undisturbed and invulnerable, stout and brave, challenging, impetuous, blazing steadfast, commander of the brave, highly intelligent, valiant, illustrious, pray ascend the chariot of victory over the rebellious lands. 
4610 :O friends, rejoice and rise and, with love, loyalty and judgement, cooperate with this Indra, mighty leader, winner and promoter of human habitations, lands, cows and culture, strong of thunder arms, victor of battles and destroyer of adversity and adversaries by the light Indra, breaker of clouds and enemy strongholds with his courage and valour, unbreakable hero of hundredfold passion, unshakable destroyer of enemy forces, irresistible warrior may, we pray, protect our army in our assaults and advances. 
4611 :O Brhaspati, commander of boundless forces, destroyer of destroyers, repelling the unfriendly forces, breaking down enemies, crushing the opponents, come by the chariot, destroy the negative forces and be the protector of our life, homes and cities. 
4612 :Of these armies of the Devas, divine powers of nature and humanity, men of noble intention and far sight, breaking through and conquering evil and negative elements of life, Indra of lightning force is the leader, Brhaspati, commanding knowledge, tactics and long range vision, is the guide with yajna, values of cooperation, self-sacrifice and creativity, on his right, and Soma, lover of peace and felicity, is the inspiration, while Maruts, warriors of passion and enthusiasm, are the central force, they should move all round. 
4613 :Great is the valour and passion of virile and victorious Indra, of the ruler Varuna, of the visionary Adityas, and of impetuous Maruts, all great and magnanimous at heart, who shake the world with their vision and performance, and so, let the tumultuous uproar of the victory of these divinities rise and reverberate in the skies. 
4614 :raise our flag high in the flag lines. May our shots of arrows hit the targets and win the battles. Let our brave progeny and our brave warriors be higher than others in excellence. And may the divinities protect us in the call to action in the battle field. 
4615 :Here I come to peace and rest of high order (after the end of the turmoil). Let the heaven and earth be kind and gracious to me. May the quarters of space and the sub-quarters be free from enmity and opposition. O man, O nature, O adversary, we hate you not, we pollute you not. Let there be freedom from fear for all of us all round. 
4616 :Indra, ruler of the world, whatever we fear from, wherever we fear, give us freedom from fear everywhere. O lord of power and glory, strengthen us with all your modes and means of protection. Eliminate all haters, destroy all conflict and eliminate mutual warfare. 
4617 :We invoke, honour and adore Indra, ruling lord of the world, who makes everything possible for us to achieve. May we, in conformity and cooperation with humans and animals both, accomplish our work and achieve our goals. Let not the forces of hate and violence approach us ever. O lord of power, Indra, pray eliminate all forces of hate and enmity, varied, expansive or scattered, whatever and wherever they be. 
4618 :Indra is the saviour, protector and promoter, breaker of the cloud, dispeller of darkness and mover of stagnation. Indra is upraiser of the farthest and the highest, the lord worthy of choice and adoration. May he be our protector from the top on high, from the Indra, lord of knowledge and wisdom, you lead us to that vast world of life where there is bliss, peace and heavenly light, fearlessness and all round well being. Lord inviolable and adorable, mighty are your arms of protection, a boundless haven of safety, where, we pray, we may abide secure at peace. 
4619 :May the middle regions of the sky be free from fear for us, both these heaven and earth be free from fear, let there be fearlessness from behind, fearlessness from the front, and may there be fearlessness from above and from below for all of us. 
4620 :May there be fearlessness from friends, no fear from non-friends, no fear from those we know, no fear from whatever is upfront, no fear by night, no fear by day for us. May all quarters of space be friends to us, free from hate and fear. 
4621 :May Savita, inspirer of life, and Shachipati, master of power and noble action, make us free from fear and from enemies from the east and from the west. May they render us free from fear and enemies from the south and from the north. 
4622 :Let the Adityas, sun in zodiacs, protect me from the regions of light, let the earthly fires and yajnic flames protect me from earthly dangers, let Indra-and-Agni, electric and heat energy, protect me from the front, let Ashvins, complementarities of nature, protect me all round, let the man of the knowledge of life forms protect cows and other animals as well as reptiles. Let nature’s divine powers that evolve forms of existence be my protective shield all round. 
4623 :May Agni, leading light of life on earth, with Vasus, life sustaining powers and energies, protect and promote me forward from the front direction. Therein I advance. Therein I rest and sustain myself. That life and light I attain to. May that guard me. May that preserve me. To that I offer myself life and soul. Thus do I surrender in truth of word and deed. 
4624 :firmament, with the middle regions, from the same direction protect and promote me. Therein I advance. Therein I rest and sustain myself. That same supreme life and energy I attain to. May that guard me. May that preserve me. To that I surrender myself life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4625 :May Soma, inspiring spirit of divine life, with Rudras, breath of life energies, from the right direction protect and promote me. Therein I advance. Therein I rest for my mainstay. That same supreme life and breath I attain to. May that guard me. May that save me. To that I surrender myself life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4626 :May Varuna, cosmic umbrella of life, with Adityas, life rays of the sun, from the same direction protect and promote me. Therein I advance. Therein I rest for my mainstay. That same light of life I attain to. May that guard me. May that save me. To that I surrender myself life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4627 :May the Surya, light of life, with heaven and earth, protect and promote me from the western direction. Therein I advance. Therein I rest for my mainstay. That same light and illumination I attain to. May that guard me. May that save me. To that I surrender myself life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4628 :May the divine waters of nature rich in herbs of medicinal efficacy protect and promote me from the same direction. Therein I advance. Therein I rest and find my haven. That health and efficacy I attain to. May that guard me. May that sustain me. To that I surrender myself life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4629 :May Vishvakarma, divine maker of the universe, with seven sages, protect and promote me from the north direction. Therein I advance. Therein I rest and find my haven. There itself I attain to as my goal. May that guard me. May that preserve me. To him I surrender myself life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4630 :May Indra, lord omnipotent, with his force of Maruts, mighty winds and rays of energy, protect and promote me from that very direction. Therein I advance. Therein I rest and find sustenance. There itself I attain to as my goal. May that guard me. May that save me. To him I surrender life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4631 :May Prajapati, father sustainer of his people, with procreative power and stability, protect and promote me from the fixed direction below. Therein I advance. Therein I rest and find a haven. There itself I attain to as my goal. May that guard me. May that save me. To him I surrender life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4632 :May Brhaspati, lord supreme of the expansive universe, with all divinities of the natural and human world protect and promote me from the direction above. Therein I advance, therein I rest and find a haven. There only I attain to as my goal. May that guard me. May that save me. To him I surrender life and soul in truth of word and deed. 
4633 :To the dispensation of Agni, light of life, with the Vasus, life sustainers, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of evil and negative nature and treat and hurt me as an enemy, from the eastern direction. 
4634 :To the dispensation of Vayu, life giving breath of divinity, lord of the skies, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of evil and negative nature and treat and hurt me as an enemy, from the eastern direction. 
4635 :To the dispensation of Soma, lord of life and purity, commanding the Rudras, dispensers of justice and punishment, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of negative and evil nature and treat and hurt me as an enemy, from the southern direction. 
4636 :To the dispensation of Varuna, lord of justice and wisdom, commanding the lazer beams of sun-rays, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of negative and destructive nature and treat and hurt me as an enemy, from this same southern direction. 
4637 :To the dispensation of Surya, self-refugent sun, who wields the heaven and earth, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of negative and destructive nature and treat and hurt me as an enemy, from the western direction. 
4638 :To the dispensation of divine waters blest with life-giving herbs may they proceed in the course of justice who are of negative and destructive nature and treat and hurt me, from the same western direction as an enemy. 
4639 :To the dispensation of Vishvakarma, lord maker of the universe, who creates with the seven sages, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of negative and destructive nature and treat and hurt me as an alien, from the northern direction. 
4640 :To the dispensation of Indra, lord omnipotent, who commands the tempestuous windy Maruts of the skies, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of negative and destructive nature and treat and hurt me as an alien, from the same northern direction. 
4641 :To the dispensation of Prajapati, father of his creation, with procreative powers, may they proceed in the course of justice who are of negative and sinful nature and treat and hurt me as an alien, from the firm unshakable direction of the earth below. 
4642 :To the dispensation of Brhaspati, lord supreme of the expansive universe, who commands all the divinities of the world, human and natural, must they proceed in the ultimate course of justice who persist in their negative and sinful nature and treat and hurt me as a slave, from the direction high above. 
4643 :Mitra, friendly Agni, fire and magnetic energy, arose with the earth. O seekers, to that city of energy, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter and move forward there, and may the earth bless you with peace and protection. 
4644 :Vayu, wind and electric energy, arose with the middle regions. O seekers, to that city of Vayu energy, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may the middle regions and the wind and electric energy bless you with peace and protection. 
4645 :Tjgf r^cTi^ 5 biy-Hi gt g rrfgrfg cn i mgr Pcj'vih gt g Pc/vi h gig: TTEtf ii 3 n Surya, the sun, arose with the regions of heaven. O seekers, to that city of the sun and solar energy, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may the heaven and the sun bless you with peace and protection. 
4646 :Chandrama, the moon, arose with Nakshatras, star constellations. O seekers, to that city of the moon and star constellations, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may the moon and the constellations bless you with peace and protection. 
4647 :Soma, peace of life and pleasure of good health and cheer, arose with herbs and sanatives. O seekers, to that city of Soma, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may the Soma bless you with peace and protection. 
4648 :Yajna, creative cooperation for production and advancement, arose with Dakshinas, profuse gifts for society and posterity. O seekers, to that city of yajna and prosperity, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may yajna and Dakshina bless you with peace and protection. 
4649 :The sea arose with streams and rivers. O seekers, to that city of the seas and streams and rivers, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may the seas and rivers provide you with peace, prosperity and protection. 
4650 :Brahma, Veda and Brahma awareness, arose with Brahmachari. O seekers, to that city of Brahma and Brahmacharis, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may the Veda and Brahmacharis bring you peace, prosperity and protection. 
4651 :Indra, Ruling power, arose with generous virility. O seekers, to that city of Indra, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may Indra and ruling generosity provide you with peace, prosperity and protection. 
4652 :The Devas, divinities of nature and humanity, arose with nectar. O seekers, to that city of Devas and nectar, we lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may the Devas bless you with peace, protection and prosperity. 
4653 :Prajapati, father of his people, arose with the people. O seekers, to that city of Prajapati and his people, I lead you on. Come and enter there, enter there and move forward, and may Prajapati and his people provide you peace, prosperity and protection all round. 
4654 :Whatever the cause of human death (such as deprivation, war and murder), the same, Indra, world ruler, Agni, leading light and value-advisor, Dhata, controller of law and order, Savita, keeper of wealth and production, Brhaspati, commander of the expansive forces, Soma, keeper of the peace and matters of culture, Raja Varuna, regional rulers, Ashvins, complementary powers such as physician and surgeon, scientist and technologist, teacher and preacher, and Yama, supreme controller, have ruled out and set aside. May Pusha, natural health, nourishment and internal resistance of immunity protect us against untimely death. 
4655 :Those many modes and means of protection, which Prajapati, lord of the world and father sustainer of his children, Matarishva, cosmic breath energy of life, have created for the people, and which pervade in all directions and sub-directions of space, may, I pray, be all round armours of defence and protection for me against violence and death. 
4656 :O man, may that armour of physical, moral and spiritual discipline which Indra, lord omnipotent, created for you and which divine personalities in human form, brilliant with divine knowledge and wisdom, bestowed on your different body forms (gross, subtle and causal), protect and promote us all round. 
4657 :May heaven and earth provide me the armour of defence and protection. May the day provide me the armour. May the sun provide me the armour. May all divinities of the world, of nature and humanity, provide me the armour of defence and protection. Let no opposition, no negativity, no calamity touch and hurt me. 
4658 :Gayatri, Ushnik, Anushtup, Brhati, Pankti, Trishtup, and Jagati, these are the Vedic metres. (To these, homage.) (Gayatri consists of twenty four syllables, Ushnik of twenty eight, Anushtup of thirty two, Brhati of thirty six, Pankti of forty, Trishtup of forty four, and Jagati of forty eight syllables.) Homage to Divinity in truth of word and deed with the first five Anuvakas of the Angirasas, science of pranic energy of life (for the five elements of the body and the universe). 
4659 :Note: This Sukta has been interpreted in two ways: one, purely on structural basis and, secondly on thematic basis. So where as Satavalekara interprets it on structural basis, Kshemakarana Dasa interprets it on thematic basis. So Satavalekara: Homage, with first five Anuvakas of the Angirasas.Kshemakarana Das: Homage, with relevant verses, divinely revealed in the Veda on the theme of the first five elements of earth, water, fire, vayu energy and other. 
4660 :Svaha for the seventh and eighth (Ahankara and Buddhi, i.e., I-sense of identity and Intelligence). 
4661 :Svaha for the green ones for the cure of jaundice, wifll ^ II Svaha for the revolving, recurring and repeating at regular intervals with appropriate treatment. 
4662 :Svaha for shells of the first order (born of lightning, gold or golden itself). 
4663 :Svaha for shells of the second order (bom of the sea). 
4664 :Svaha for cure of the penultimates and release from penultimate bonds. 
4665 :Svaha for the middling ones (of the bonds). ■StffWT: II S'* II Svaha for the Rshis, divine visionaries (and five senses, mind and intellect). 
4666 :Svaha for individual organisations of a thousand. 
4667 :Svaha for the ultimate divine knowledge, the ultimate human order, and the highest and ultimate Divine Order of Reality in existence. 
4668 :Satavalekara’s Note: There are twenty Kandas (Books) in the Atharva-veda. The descriptions of the Anuvakas, Suktas and Ganas including the Rshis are indicated in these twenty verses. 
4669 :United and organised are all greats and grandeurs of matter, energy and mind of Prakrti, Jiva and Brahma, of which the first and highest is Brahma. Brahma first self-manifested and creatively evolved the light of heavenly awareness and divine will. Of the first evolved forms of being, Brahma was the first that manifested himself and emerged as the creator. 
4670 :For four-verse hymns on four adorables (Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha) of the sages of unshakable mind and spirit, Svaha, homage in truth of word and deed. 
4671 :For six-verse hymns (on six adorable seasons of the year), Svaha. 
4672 :For eight-verse hymns (on the adorable eight Vasus and eight-fold Prakrti), Svaha. 
4673 :For nine-verse hymns (on the nine-door sacred Ayodha, the human body), Svaha. 
4674 :For ten-verse hymns (on the ten adorable senses, ten adorable pranas), Svaha. 
4675 :For thirteen-verse hymns (on thirteen adorables: eight siddhis and five natural variations of rising, falling, contraction, expansion and displacement), Svaha. 
4676 :For fourteen-verse hymns (on fourteen adorables: five perceptive senses, five volitional senses and four-fold antahkarana of mana, buddhi, chitta and ahankara), Svaha. 
4677 :For fifteen-verse hymns (on fifteen adorables: seven forms of colour, six tastes and twofold smell, agreeable and disagreeable), Svaha. 
4678 :For seventeen verse hymns (on seventeen adorables: ten directions, three Prakrti gunas, and Ishvara, Jiva, Prakrti and the world), Svaha. 
4679 :For eighteen-verse hymns (on eighteen adorables: ten principles of Dharma and eight auspicious values, i.e., Brahmana, cow, fire, water, gold, ghrta, sun and the social order), Svaha. 
4680 :elements, five senses of perception and five senses of volition), Svaha. 
4681 :United and organised are all greats and grandeurs of matter, energy and mind of Prakrti, Jiva and Brahma, of which the first and highest is Brahma. Brahma first self-manifested and creatively evolved the light of heavenly awareness and divine will. Of the first evolved forms of being, Brahma was the first that manifested Itself and emerged as the creator. 
4682 :By the law and commitment by which the Devas, divine powers and brilliancies of Nature, fully hold and wholly support Savita, the divine, self-refulgent, all- inspiring Sun, O Brahmanaspati, high priest of this great Dominion, you and other enlightened personalities, invest and consecrate this ruler in his office for the sake of the Rashtra, enlightened self-governing social order. 
4683 :O people of the land, for the sake of the great social order, hold and support this Indra, mighty ruler, for good health and full age, so that I may lead him unto his full age of fulfilment and he may always abide, awake and alert, by the great dominion. 
4684 :O high priest and people of the great social order, hold and support this Soma, inspiring ruler and lover of peace and happiness, for good health, full age and a great sensitive ear for knowledge, information and alleviation of want and suffering, so that I may lead him unto his full age of fulfilment and he may always abide awake and alert for information and rectification of the state problems. 
4685 :Invest him with the robes of office. Hold and support him for ourselves with vigour and honour in lustre and splendour to live a long, healthy, full age till the end and total fulfilment, so that this Soma Ruler may wear these robes which Brhaspati, sage of great Vedic wisdom, has given him to wear for his office. 
4686 :O Ruler, put on the robes of office, be the defender and promoter of your people against evil and misfortune, reach the fulfilment of your life, live a full hundred years of abundant joy, wrapped in wealth, plenty and prosperity. 
4687 :O Ruler, put on this robe of office for the honour and well being of your dominion and her people. Be protector and promoter of the water reservoirs and fields against pollution and depletion. Live a full hundred years of life full of abundant wealth and joy and be the people’s favourite sharer and dispenser of the wealth, dignity and excellences of life. 
4688 :O friends, in every joint programme of the nation in planning and development, in every battle of life, at every juncture, let us call upon the mighty and mightier Indra, the Ruler, swift and instant in action, for our defence, protection and progress. 
4689 :O man, O Ruler, golden in graces, ever youthful, nobly brave, scorning infirmity and challenging death, mix, merge and live one with the people. So says Agni, the leading light of life. So says Soma, spirit of peace and felicity. So says Brhaspati, the sage of divine knowledge unbound. So says Indra, lord omnipotent. And so says Savita, the spirit of universal refulgence and inspiration for life and living. 
4690 :O man, O Ruler, I call upon you and join you with the mind and will of the first and indefatigable order of the Dominion. Be the pioneer to rise and lead the nation to the top, and having led us there, move on farther and higher. 
4691 :One who wears gold, (and the golden glow of lustrous vitality of health), bom of the crucibles of fire, bears the immortal nectar spirit of life among mortals. Whoever knows this, deserves this, and one who wears this becomes immune to old age and infirmity till death. 
4692 :That glowing gold which ancient men blest with children received by the sun, that vests you with the lustrous glow of health and grace, and whoever bears that glow is blest with good health and long age. 
4693 :I vest you with the glowing grace of gold and lustrous vitality for the sake of good health and long age, strength, lustre and the splendour of life, so that with the glow of that gold you shine among the people around. 
4694 :That gracious gold and golden glow of health which the refulgent Varuna, man of judgement and right choice, knows and possesses, which the divine Brhaspati, sage of unbounded wisdom, knows and possesses, which Indra, potent destroyer of the clouds of darkness, knows and possesses, that very gold and lustrous glow, I wish and pray, may be the vigorous health and longevity for you, that may be the life’s glory for you. 
4695 :Let ‘Vrshabha’, generous Divinity, protect you with Vedic verses, let ‘Vrsha’, the abundant mind, protect and advance you with dynamic thoughts and emotions, let ‘Vayu’, pranic energy, protect you with divine vision in meditation through pranayama, and let ‘Indra’, the soul, protect you with its own potential of the mind and senses. 
4696 :Let Soma, the divine herb, protect you with oshadhis, medical applications, let the sun protect you with constellations of stars, let Chandrama, the moon, destroyer and dispeller of night’s darkness, protect you month by month, and let the air protect you with pranic energy. 
4697 :Three are the heavens, say the wise, i.e., three are the orders of the regions of light, three are the regions of the earth, three are the regions of the firmament, and four are the oceans, threefold is the Stoma, structure of the musical composition of the verses of adoration, and three are the orders of water. May all these of three orders protect us with their threefold potentials. 
4698 :Three are the ‘Nakas’, states of divine bliss, three are the stages of human living, Brahmacharya, Grhastha and Vanaprastha, three are the ‘Bradhnas’, greats, i.e., Ishvara, Jiva and Prakrti, and three are the Vaishtapas, orders of freedom from sufferings of the body, mind and soul. Three are the orders of wind and air, i.e., in summer, winter and rains. And three are the states of the sun as in winter, summer and rains. These three orders of all, I ordain as your protectors. 
4699 :O leading light, Agni, I sprinkle you with ghrta, thereby raising you with Ajya, special preparation of ghrta, further, so that no clever negative forces may suppress the pranic energies gifted by the sacred fire, sun and moon through yajna. 
4700 :prana, your apana and your lustre and grandeur. O brilliant divinities, blazing lustrous, knowers of all overt and covert facts of the world of existence, wash yourselves clean with divine purities and run on. 
4701 :Lord Almighty invests Agni with pranic energy. The wind and air is invested with prana. The divine powers of Nature, Devas, create the versatile, all radiant, all illuminative sun and vest it with prana. 
4702 :O man, live with full life energy, gift of those divine powers which create the life energy for you. Live with good health for a full age. Never die an untimely death. Live with the life inspiration of those who live and command life energy of the spirit. Never fall a prey to the snares of untimely death. 
4703 :That mysterious but collected treasure of the gifts of divinities which Indra, the soul, received and secured through its karmic performance on the noble paths of action worthy of divinities, and which same golden treasure, the triple dynamics of nature, society and divinity at work in the mind and spirit protected and promoted, that very treasure of your potential, O man, may the three orders of nature, society and divinity protect and promote with threefold blessings. (Refer back to mantra 3 and 4.) Thirty three are the Divinities, i.e., eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, Indra and Prajapati, three are the potentials, i.e., physical, mental and spiritual, all dear, loving and cooperative, which protect and sustain the treasure of human identity within its karmic personality. With this golden treasure of its identity and potential in the golden cave of the heart, let man perform his actions at his best. 
4704 :Note: Eight Vasus are: earth, water, fire, air, space, moon, sun and stars. They are called Vasus because they provide the abode and sustenance for life. 
4705 :Eleven Rudras are: ten pranas or vital energies, and the soul. These are called Rudras because they cause sorrow when they forsake man’s life. 
4706 :Twelve Adityas are the Zodiacs of the sun in the yearly round Indra is cosmic energy and Prajapati, the cosmic yajna. Both these may also be described as the individual soul and the Super-soul. 
4707 :Those Divinities which are eleven and abide in the heaven of light may accept and cherish this homage of havi. 
4708 :Those eleven Divinities which abide in the middle region may accept and cherish this homage of havi. 
4709 :Those eleven Divinities which abide in the earthly sphere may accept and cherish this homage of havi. 
4710 :May Savita, inspirer of life, and Shachipati, master of power and noble action, make us free from fear and enemies from the east and from the west. May they render us free from fear and enemies from the south and from the north. 
4711 :May the Aditya, sun in zodiacs, protect me from the regions of light, may the earthly fires and yajnic flames protect me from earthly dangers, may Indra and Agni, electric and heat energy, protect me from the front, may Ashvins, complementarities of nature, protect me all round, may the man of knowledge of life forms protect cows and other animals as well as reptiles. May nature’s divine powers that evolve forms of existence be my protective shield all round. 
4712 :O man, for a long healthy life, I bind on you this jewel Darbha, a catalytic agent, which puts down rival elements and burns out the very heart centre of negative forces. 
4713 :(‘Darbha’, the word is derived from the root ‘dr’ which means ‘to break’. It is something that is valuable, powerful and adorable. In this sukta, it has been interpreted as the Darbha grass which is purest white, most adorable and effective against ailments. The other interpretation is ‘the commander of the forces of defence’. Reference: “Dayananada Vaidic Kosha”, by Rajavir Shastri, Delhi: Arsha Sahitya Trust, and “Atharva-veda Bhashyam” by Vishvanath Vidyalankar, published by Ram Lai Kapur Trust, and Atharva-veda commentaries by Kshemakarana Das, and by W.D. Whitney) Scorching the heart of the jealous, heating up the mind of the enemies, you, O Darbha, destroyer, be active like the very fire and the sun, distressing and burning up all the undaunted elements, negative and evil at heart. 
4714 :O Darbha, O Jewel, blazing like fire and the sun, scorching the jealous, break the rivals to the very core of the heart, like Indra, lightning, striking and breaking the cloud asunder. 
4715 :O Darbha, O Jewel, break asunder the heart core of the rival and jealous negative forces and, rising like the sun removing the dark veil of the earth, throw off the umbrella cover of these enemy forces. 
4716 :O Darbha, break down my rival forces, disintegrate the forces that fight against me. Break off all those that act against my heart and soul. O Jewel, break down all the forces that jealously deplete me. 
4717 :O Darbha, split up and destroy my rival forces, split up and destroy the forces that fight against me, O Jewel, destroy all the evil at heart that work against me, destroy all the jealous forces acting against me. 
4718 :O Darbha, uproot all my rivals, uproot all the enemy forces fighting against me. O Jewel, root out all the evil at heart that work against me, root out all the jealous forces acting against me. 
4719 :O Darbha, cut down to nothing all my rivals, cut down to nothing all my adversaries. O Mani, cut down to naught all the evil that work against my heart, cut down to naught all jealousies against my system. 
4720 :O Darbha, crush all the rivals, crush all the adversaries acting against me. O Mani, crush all the evil at heart that work against me, crush all the jealousies against my system. 
4721 :O Darbha, pierce to naught all my rivals, pierce to zero germination all my adversaries. O Mani, pierce to death all the evil at heart that work against me, pierce down to nothing all the jealous forces against my system. 
4722 :O Darbha, destroyer of negativities, split up my rivals, split up my fighting adversaries. Split up all the evil at heart against me. O Mani, split up all the jealous forces that act against me. 
4723 :O Darbha, destroyer of negativities, cleave my rivals, cleave my fighting adversaries. Cleave all the evil at heart opposed to me. O Mani, cleave all the jealous forces standing against me. 
4724 :O Darbha, destroyer of negativities, shut off all my rivals, shut off all my adversaries. O Mani, shut off all negative forces which are evil at heart, shut out all jealous forces active against me. 
4725 :O Darbha, destroyer of negativities, reduce to dust my rivals, crush to dust my fighting rivals. Crush to dust all forces evil at heart against me, crush to dust, O Mani, all the jealous forces that stand against me. 
4726 :O Darbha, destroyer of negativities, shake up and churn my rivals, shake up and churn my adversaries, shake up and churn all the evil hearted opponents, shake up and churn all the jealous forces, O Mani. 
4727 :O Darbha, destroyer of destroyers, batter all my rivals, batter all my adversaries, O Mani, batter all the evil hearted ranged against me, batter all the jealous forces active against me. 
4728 :O Darbha, destroyer of negative forces, heat and eliminate all my rivals, heat and destroy all my adversaries. O Mani, heat and eliminate all evil at heart against me, heat and destroy all jealous forces active against me. 
4729 :O Darbha, destroyer of negativities, burn and consume all my rivals, burn and consume all my adversaries. O Mani, burn and consume all the evil hearted ranged against me, burn and consume all the jealous forces active against me. 
4730 :O Darbha, destroyer of enmities, kill all my rivals, kill all my adversaries. O Mani, kill all the evil hearted ranged against me, kill all the jealous active against me. 
4731 :O Darbha, destroyer of enemies, hundred-fold is your armour of defence among armours against age and untimely death. With that same armour, strengthen this man-warrior well-guarded and, with your vigour and virilities, destroy all adversaries ranged against him. 
4732 :O Darbha, destroyer of destroyers, hundredfold are your armours of defence, thousandfold your vigour and virility, strength, courage and heroism. Such as you are, all world divinities of nature and humanity have given you unto this man to bear and wear against infirmity till full age and death. 
4733 :O Darbha, they say you are Deva-varma, armour of divinities, Brahmanaspati, protector and sustainer of the expansive world and of the universal knowledge of existence. They say you are the armour of Indra, the omnipotent, and you defend and protect the social order of world dominions. 
4734 :Darbha, the jewel destroyer of adversaries, heart burner of jealous enemies, O man, O Ruler, I make the promoter of the social order, protector of the body politic, for you. 
4735 :When the ocean roared and the cloud thundered with lightning, then was bom the golden drop, invincible vitality, and thence arose the Darbha. 
4736 :May Savita, creative genius, with Vedha, the expert of specialised knowledge, with Audumbara mani, a prize preparation of Ficus Glomerata, develop in my cow stall plenty of all breeds of healthy animals for me as I am keen for the health, growth and development of animals. 
4737 :yajna, be the preserver and promoter of the animals, and may the efficacious and abundant Audumbara mani augment me with growth and prosperity. 
4738 :Abundance of fertility and fruitfulness, profusion of self-sufficiency in food and drink, and growth of prosperity, may Dhata, lord of the world order, bear and bring into our home by the power and lustre of the efficacy of Audumbara. 
4739 :Whatever bipeds and quadrupeds there be around, whatever foods and delicious drinks there be in the world, I pray, bearing the divine Audumbara mani and performing the sacred home fire yajna, I may have the best in abundance of them. 
4740 :I have taken up the care, welfare and growth of the biped and quadruped living beings. I have also received their gift of food grains, milk of cows and other milch animals, and the juice of herbs. May Brhaspati Savita, lord omniscient and omnificent, inspire and bless me with abundance of all that wealth. 
4741 :Let me be the master protector and promoter of animals. May the lord of health and growth bless me with health, growth and all round development. May the divine Audumbara mani bring me wealth, honour and excellence. 
4742 :Audumbara mani, with people and with wealth, indeed the jewel gift inspired and energised by Indra, mighty world ruler, has come to me with honour and grandeur. 
4743 :May the divine, generous jewel, destroyer of adversaries, giver of wealth and honour, we pray, steadily give us abundant growth of animals, food grains, and the growth and development of cows for the progress of the common wealth of humanity. 
4744 :O Vanaspati, master protector and developer of forests and the green revolution from early times, just as you have come up with health, growth and development of humanity and the environment, so may Sarasvati, mother knowledge, bear and bring us abundant growth of wealth for us. 
4745 :To us all, may Sarasvati, generous mother giver of food for all, bring plenty of food and wealth, and so may this Audumbara mani bring us food, wealth, honour and excellence. 
4746 :Audumbara mani, you are supreme over all other jewels. You are generous. In you the lord of creative evolution placed strength and energy for growth. In you abide all these nourishments, energies and wealths of life. O all-supreme master of strength, growth and prosperity, drive off from us indigence, lack of understanding and hunger. 
4747 :u± h u H4Ph u iy. u HvrsrrqifMP m 1 Thisf*r ttf Ph^ i % fr^fr -qft/ sjrrmflf Tf^rdrr rf^f You are the leader of villages, leader anointed and consecrated, rise and bless me with lustre. You are all splendour, bless me with splendour. You are supreme ruler of wealth, honour and excellence. Pray invest me too with honour, wealth and excellence. 
4748 :You are nourishment and growth itself. Invest me with nourishment and growth. You are ideal master of the home dedicated to yajna and the family. Make me a good householder. You are Audumbara, treasure of wide virtues, wealth and power of life. Give us wealth all worthy of the brave. I hold on to you for peace, prosperity and progress. 
4749 :Mighty brave is this Audumbara mani, worthy of the brave to wear and bear. Let it make our share of wealth for body, mind and soul full of honey sweets. May it give us wealth, honour and excellence wholly worthy of all the brave. 
4750 :Note: As the theme of Audumbara-mani grows in this Sukta, it becomes clear that this ‘jewel’ is not simply a magical amulet from the Udumbara tree. It is a valuable extract from the tree, very efficacious in home yajna too for the growth of health and development of animals (verses 1-5). Then it becomes the source of health, wealth and progeny (6-8). Then the thought moves on to Sarasvati (mother of knowledge), Vanaspati (preserver, developer and manager of forests, also the sun), and Gramani (village leader), which are all human and divine variations of the source of health, wealth, honour, excellence and enlightenment. At the end the ‘mani’ becomes the sole source of humanity’s share of food, energy and excellence for body, mind and soul, Lord Supreme, diversifier as well as the unifier of all that is. The Sukta is a mystical vision of the concrete, moving up to the mysterious. 
4751 :Darbha ordinarily is Kusha grass, specially white, different from ordinary Kusha and Kasa. But derived from the root ‘dr’, ‘to break’, in Vedic language it would mean ‘the breaker of negativities and joiner of positivities to wholeness’, a giver of invulnerable strength. Darbha, then, is to be understood as both medicinal and metaphorical. 
4752 :Hundred stemmed, inviolable, thousand leaved, the efficacious saviour Darbha, powerful healer, I bind on you for good health and long life. 
4753 :No way can diseases remove his hair nor strike at his chest to whom the physician provides health and security with Darbha of whole and unbroken leaves. 
4754 :O Saviour from suffering, Oshadhi, your top is in the sun while you are rooted on the earth. By you, who expand over a hundred stems and branches, we increase and immunise the life and health of people. 
4755 :fcTch 34rJdU|pdW fUT: ■tffstcft^TT I term £ ^fdT Pd fg h'uiRj cj^ifn n x n O Darbha, destroyer and preserver, you pervade the three heavens and these three regions of the earth, you penetrate and break the negativities to join the positivities. With you as sanative saviour, I pierce through the tongue of the evil hearted and disintegrate their words. 
4756 :O Darbha, you are master of patience and courage, victor of war, in the process of fighting, I am courageous and challenging too on way to battle, unflinching. Both of us together, possessed of strength, courage and will, ready to fight, shall conquer the adversaries. 
4757 :Fight and rout the proud adversary. Fight and defeat the enemies upfront on the field. Challenge and overthrow all those evil hearted. Let the good hearted be many around me. 
4758 :By Darbha, eternal destroyer and preserver, realised by brilliant divines, all sustaining master in heaven, I, eternal too, always win people over, and I pray I may continue to win. 
4759 :O Darbha, destroyer and preserver, eternal sanative, render me dear and loving to and loved by all Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Shudras, whoever we love and desire, and all those who have the eye to see (and discriminate right and wrong). 
4760 :He that, self-manifesting, created and stabilised the earth, who sustained and stabilised the firmament and the heaven, whom the evil at heart never know and realise, that Darbha, destroyer and preserver, Varuna, divine umbrella, lord of judgement and eternal goodness, may, we pray, bless us with heavenly light. 
4761 :He, destroyer of adversaries, of infinite manifestations, infinitely loving and loved, lord of courage and patience, all victorious, is the first and highest of all saviour sanatives. May he, Darbha, destroyer and preserver, protect and promote us all round. By him, may I win over those who stand against me and battle with negative forces. 
4762 :Adorable and adored a thousand ways, infinitely manifested in stems and branches, universally loved, treasurehold of delicious food and drink, flashing like lightning fire of the clouds, royal majestic among sanative herbs, may Darbha, divine destroyer and preserver, refulgent jewel of the universe, join us with health and age through the human body on earth. May the Lord protect and promote us all round. 
4763 :Like fire and light raised from ghrta, bearing sweets of joy as honey, abundant with delicious food and drink, firm as earth, unshakable shaker, throwing off adversaries and razing them down, may Darbha, destroyer of negativities for rehabilitation of positivities, arise in our consciousness along with the sense, mind and power of the Great. 
4764 :O Darbha, with the blaze of your splendour, you pervade and transcend the earth. You sit with the holy fire in the vedi, beatific presence in the yajna of love free from violence. Pure, immaculate and holy, the seers realise you in the heart. Pray, purify and sanctify us, lord, free us from all sin and evil. 
4765 :Brilliant, patient and penetrative, ruling light of life, victorious, destroyer of evil, all-watching lover of humanity, this Darbha is the strength and splendour of divinities. With this, O man, I join you for a long full age and all round well being. 
4766 :O man, with Darbha by you, do heroic deeds. Bearing Darbha by heart and soul, suffer no fear and despair. Surpassing others with your power and lustre, shine like the sun over all the four directions and subdirections. 
4767 :O Jangida, you are Jangida, devourer of disease. You are Jangida, the protector. May Jangida protect our bipeds and our quadrupeds. 
4768 :Hundred and fifty’s are the deadly diseases, and hundreds are the mysterious evil ones. All these, may Jangida turn to saplessness, deprive them of their virulence, and stop their growth immediately. 
4769 :so, pray, shoot off the hoarse voice and dry the cough, cure the seven kinds of debility, decay, paralysis and disjointures, and so pray cure loss of understanding and loss of memory. 
4770 :Jangida is the cure of indigence and evil tendencies of the mind. May Jangida, patient, resistant and powerful, save our health and vigour and help us to live a long, full life of good cheer. 
4771 :That is the greatness of vigorous and lustrous Jangida by which it may, we wish and pray, protect us all round all ways, the same lustre and grandeur by which it fights and roots out Vishkandha and Samskandha, partial as well as the total debility of the body system. 
4772 :Thrice in the year do the learned specialists grow and develop you, Jangida, and versatile as you are, the ancient Brahmanas knew you and called you ‘Angira’, the comprehensive, the universal, the panacea. 
4773 :Neither the old medications nor the latest excel and out-date you, Jangida, being the preventive, the strong, the protector, the auspicious immunizer. 
4774 :O Jangida, generous giver of health and longevity, great with grandeur, boundless strong and powerful, earlier the lustrous men fed on you and, long before any virulent disease could devour them, Indra, lord omnipotent, vested you with unassailable strength and efficacy. 
4775 :O Jangida, Vanaspati, Oshadhi, giver of heat and light of life, as the omnipotent Indra rendered you vigorous and lustrous, therefore destroy and eliminate all suffering and diseases, kill all germs and viruses, O Jangida, render ineffectual all diseases which break down the body system, rheumatic pains, consumption and cancer, back pains and autumnal fevers repeating every year. 
4776 :Meditating on Indra, omnipotent lord of universal energy, in earnest, ancient seers discovered and gave Jangida Vanaspati to mankind, Jangida which universal divinities of nature earlier had made the best cure of Vishkandha, general break down of the body system. 
4777 :loss of health just as a rich man protects and safeguards his wealth, Jangida which brilliant and divine Brahmanas developed as a general tonic and protective for health against disease and adversity. 
4778 :The evil hearted, cruel, evil eyed, evil doer, whoever such is risen and come, all these, O thousandeyed Jangida, destroy with knowledge and awakenment. You are the saviour, the protector. 
4779 :May Jangida protect me, protect us all, from the solar regions, from the earth, from the middle regions, from herbs and trees, from the past, from the future, and from all directions of space and from sub-directions, and from everywhere. 
4780 :Whatever the violent killer diseases, whether caused by natural forces or by infective body organs, or by any other, which come up and recur, may Jangida, general universal cure render them ineffectual. 
4781 :Let Shatavara, herb of a hundred efficacies, with its vigour and keenness, cure and destroy cancers and counsumptions. Let this destroyer of notorious diseases pass into the body system with its power and lustre and work up the cure. 
4782 :With its thorns it eliminates the destructive bacteria, with its root it cures the painful winds, with its middle part it cures and prevents cancerous consumption. No malignant force can obstruct or suppress the curative effect of it. 
4783 :Whatever the cancerous consumption, whether minor or major or virulent, all these notorious ones, Shatavara mani destroys. 
4784 :Shatavara has given new life to a hundred brave. It has eliminated a hundred cancers and consumptions. It destroys notorious ailments, and shakes and throws out dangerous and destructive causes of these killer diseases. 
4785 :Of golden curative thrust is this jewel herb, Rshabha of the Shatavara family. It destroys all notorious diseases and attacks and destroys all the killer causes of these diseases. 
4786 :With Shatavara, I ward off, cure and prevent a hundred notorious diseases, a hundred of the diseases of marshy area caused by damp air and rains, and a hundred of the diseases of seasonal and relapsive nature which repeat and grow fast. 
4787 :This lustre, splendour, honour, heroic patience and courage, effulgence, youthful vigour and strength given by Agni, leading light of life, have come. May Agni give me all the manly vigour and splendour of which the variants are thirty-three. 
4788 :(Thirty three powers and splendours may be interpreted as powers gifted by thirty-three divinities. Reference may be made to Atharva-veda 19, 27, 10-13. Another interpretation could be: the powers of five senses of perception, five senses of volition, five main pranas, five sub-pranas, five gross elements, five subtle elements, and mind, intellect and the sense of Identity.) Agni, bless me with brilliance in my person, courage, power, vigour and strength. O leading light of life, I invoke and adore you for the sake of manliness, noble action, and heroic dignity with which I love to live for a full hundred years. 
4789 :I invoke, adore and meditate on you, O leading light of life, for the sake of energy, strength, brilliance, victorious patience and courage, overpowering victory and moral supremacy and dignity and glory of the social order to live honourably for a full hundred years as a noble citizen. 
4790 :I light the holy fire, offer fragrant havi and meditate on you, Agni, together with friends and fellow citizens for favour of the seasons, for gifts of the seasons, for months and years, in honour of Dhata, the sustainer, Vidhata, ordainer and law-giver, giver of prosperity, and protector of all living forms. 
4791 :Diseases stop him not, curses and imprecations touch him not, whom the aromatic fragrance of medicinal gulgulu, bdellium, reaches and fortifies. 
4792 :All cancerous diseases run away from him, fast as deer and horses, whether the gulgulu is from the river or from the sea. 
4793 :I have included both, gulgulu from the river and gulgulu from the sea for this patient’s cure and freedom from disease. 
4794 :Let Kushtha, medicinal herb of wonderful life- giving and life saving quality, come from the snowy mountain area. O Kushtha, destroy all kinds of consumptive, cancerous and life-threatening diseases and all dangerous germs, bacteria and viruses. 
4795 :O Kushtha, three are your descriptive names: Nadyamara, destroyer of waterborne diseases, nadyarisha, cleanser of water from pollution, and Nadya, friend of running water. Therefore, O Kushtha, the person whom I advise that he should take you thrice, morning, evening and in the day, would destroy all water borne ailments. 
4796 :Jivald ndma te math jivanto nama te pita. Nadydyam puruso risat. Yasmai paribravimi tvd sayamprataratho diva. 
4797 :‘Jivala’ by name is your mother, ‘Jivanta’ by name is your father. Therefore, O Kushtha, the person whom I advise that he should take you thrice, morning, evening and in the day, would destroy all water borne h-hhi %i t4ldylnmi^dniP m cj i Hill'd ni fw i MRrfPH f^crf ii ^ ii You are the best and highest of medicinal herbs as the bull among domestic animals and the tiger among wild beasts. Therefore, O Kushtha, the person for whom I prescribe you thrice, morning, evening and in the day, would destroy all water borne diseases. 
4798 :Three-phase Kushtha is born of the clouds, another three-phase Kushtha is born of the pranic energies of the wind and rays of the sun and moon, and yet another three-phase Kushtha is born of the Aditya Zodiacs of the sun. Still another three-phase Kushtha, a universal remedy, is bom of all the divinities of nature and grows with Soma. O Kushtha, destroy all kinds of consumption, cancerous diseases, and all kinds of dangerous germs, bacteria and viruses. 
4799 :Ashvattha is a constellation of stars, a haven of divinities, in the third region from this earth, in heaven. Therein is the tangible birth of nectar, and it showers from the sun when the sun is there. From that nectar is bom the Kushtha, a panacea, which grows with Soma. O Kushtha, destroy all kinds of consumptive cancerous diseases and eliminate all kinds of dangerous germs, bacteria and viruses. 
4800 :There is in heaven the golden boat with golden tackle, the celestial constellation Nau. Therein is the tangible birth of nectar which showers from the sun when the sun is there. From that nectar is born the Kushtha, the panacea which grows with Soma. O Kushtha, destroy all kinds of cancerous consumptive diseases and eliminate all kinds of dangerous germs, bacteria and viruses. 
4801 :Where the top of snowy mountain is, whence there is no fall, there is the tangible source of nectar. Therefrom is the Kushtha bom, Kushtha, the panacea which grows with Soma. O Kushtha, destroy all kinds of cancerous consumptive diseases and eliminate all kinds of dangerous germs, bacteria and viruses. 
4802 :O Kushtha, whom the first lover of Divinity in the medium of language knew and realised, or whom the lover and seeker of divine panacea sought and found, and whom Vasa, brilliant scientist sought and practically realised, or whom the versatile wandering pioneer discovered, for all these reasons you are the universal cure of sickness, disease and depressive alienation. 
4803 :O Kushtha, universal tonic and total regenerator, cure, remove and eliminate the brain disorders, third day relapsive fever, stiffness of the body system, yearly recurring ailments, all general diseases and paralysis of the lower half of the body. 
4804 :Whatever the weakness of mind in me, whatever the indiscretion of language and communication, whatever the fault that vitiates my understanding and wisdom because of my ego and passion, all that may Brhaspati, Vedic scholar and teacher knowing all and ever with me, with all other enlightened persons, repair and bring back to wholeness and balance with stability. 
4805 :O Apah, enlightened people of noble thought and action, O natural vibrations of mother knowledge, pray do not disturb our understanding, vision and imagination, do not shake up our right knowledge and faith. Moving on naturally at peace as before, keep moving on steadily with your plans and work, and whenever you call upon me, I too would act as a man of noble vision and intelligence worthy of my dignity and brilliance. 
4806 :O teachers and preachers, O parental guides, pray do not hurt our intelligence and understanding, do not disturb and hurt our commitment, do not disturb our discipline and dedication. May all of you and all people be kind and gracious to us for our life and health, let all our mother powers be kind and gracious to us. 
4807 :May the Ashvins, complementary powers of natural and social rejuvenation, teachers and preachers, parents, rulers and administrators, give us that light of intelligence and understanding which leads up across darkness and ignorance and regenerates us towards Wishing for peace, collective progress and all round well being of humanity, the seers who realised divine bliss first dedicated themselves to austere discipline and commitment to basic and universal personal, social and divine values. Thence arose Rashtra, the social order, strength, lustre and splendour. To that same discipline and commitment should all noble people submit and commit themselves, to the basic laws and values of the social order, the Rashtra. 
4808 :In yajna, Brahma is the hota, the initiator. Brahma is the yajna. By Brahma are the yajna posts set up. The adhvaryu arises by inspiration of Brahma, and havi is offered into the inner most concentrated presence of Brahma. 
4809 :In yajna, Brahma is the ladle full of ghrta. By Brahma is the vedi raised. Brahma is the essence and the inner meaning and the very being of yajna. And the participants who offer oblations of havi are all for Brahma. Everything for the lord of peace in truth of word and deed! Opting for noble thoughts and understanding by conscious choice, bearing and offering all holy thoughts and desires in adoration and service of the lord saviour from sin and evil, I pray: O lord, accept this offer of havi and bless that all desires and prayers of the yajamana be true, holy and fulfilled. 
4810 :O Ashvins, complementary powers of natural regeneration, sun and moon, noble men and women of the world, I invoke the lord who saves us from sin and evil, most powerful and generous of the adorables, self- refulgent, first and highest deity of the yajnas of love, non-violence and creative production, the lord who never allows human beings to fall a prey to evil actions, and I pray, O yajamana, may the Ashvins, by virtue of their own discipline of mind and morals, bless you with the strength of sense and mind and the light and lustre of life’s dignity. 
4811 :Where men dedicated to Brahma go, with Diksha, total commitment, and Tapas, relentless discipline, there may Agni, leading light of life, lead me and establish me with Medha, clear intelligence and vision. Homage to Agni in truth of word and deed. 
4812 :Where men dedicated to Brahma go, with Diksha, total commitment, and Tapas, relentless discipline, there may Vayu, life’s life breath divine, lead me and bless me with pranic energy. Homage to Vayu in truth of word and deed. 
4813 :Where men dedicated to Brahma go, with Diksha and Tapas, initiation, commitment and austere discipline, there may the Sun, self-refulgent light-giver, lead me. May the Sun bless me with light of the eye to see. Homage to the Sun in truth of word and deed. 
4814 :Where men dedicated to Brahma go, with Diksha and Tapas, initiation, commitment and austere discipline, there may Chandra, lord of moon bliss, lead me. May Chandra bless me with a noble mind. Homage to Chandra, lord of bliss, in truth of word and deed. 
4815 :Where men dedicated to Brahma go, with Diksha and Tapas, initiation, commitment and austere discipline, there may Soma, lord of peace, beauty and inspiration, lead me. May Soma bless me with Payah, holy food and drink for the pleasure and divine peace of life. Homage to Soma with truth of word and deed. 
4816 :Where men dedicated to Brahma go, with Diksha and Tapas, initiation, commitment and austere discipline, there may Indra, lord omnipotent, lead me. May Indra bless me with unshakable strength for life. Homage to Indra, lord of bliss, in truth of word and deed. 
4817 :Diksha and Tapas, there may Apah, dynamics of human and natural action, lead me. May Apah, enlightened people, bless me with the immortal nectar of life. Homage to the dynamics of life and living and to the fluent forces of life in truth of word and deed. 
4818 :Where men dedicated to Brahma go, with Diksha and tapas, there may Brahma, the divine sage, lead me. May Brahma bless me with the knowledge and vision of Brahma. 
4819 :Anjana, beauteous sanctifier, you are the promoter of life with health and longevity. You are called the sure and vibrant universal cure (of ailment and ignorance). Therefore, O Anjana, harbinger of peace and fulfilment, alleviate my worry and suffering, bring us peace and comfort. O Apah, pranic energies and potential for action, give us freedom from fear. 
4820 :(‘Anjana’ is derived from the root ‘Anj’ which means ‘to anoint, to beautify, to beatify, to express and reveal. ’ In this context, it can be interpreted as collyrium which beautifies the eyes, and also as the Supreme Spirit of the universe which beatifies life’s beauty and reveals the same in human form and consciousness.) whatever ailment of body, mind and sense as Harima, jaundice of body or mind, Jay any a, problems of sex relations, disorientation of the parts of body and the mind system, shooting pains, all these ailments, O man, let Anjana eliminate from all parts of your personality system. 
4821 :Anjana, born on earth, auspicious, the very life of human beings, may protect us from sudden and untimely death, give us the speed and smartness of body and mind as that of the chariot, physical and mental, and render us free from sin and evil. 
4822 :O pranic spirit of life, protect and promote our pranic energy. O Asu, breath of life, be gracious to protect and promote our life energy. O Nir-rti, controller of adversity, release us from the snares of adversity and misfortune. 
4823 :You are the progenitor of rivers and seas, you are the flower of thunder and lightning, life giver of the wind, light giver of the sun, and living bliss of the light of heaven. 
4824 :O Devanjana, lord of light, beauty and beatitude, protect and promote the three summit seats of life and bliss for humanity, i.e., the earth, the firmament, and the heavens. Protect and promote me too from all sides against all misfortunes. No herbs and sanatives whether from mountains or from elsewhere outside can ever excel and surpass you. 
4825 :Devanjana, the divine light, is come, pervades and vibrates here in this heart core of the soul. Destroyer of destroyers, eliminator of diseases, removing all ailments, may, we pray, uproot all ominous negativities from here. 
4826 :Self-refulgent ruler of the universe, Varuna, lord of judgement, all protective umbrella of life, while in the house of clay, therein man speaks a lot of this untruth. O lord of infinite power and potential, save us from that sin and evil. 
4827 :Whatever thus we have spoken of our actions to men of enlightenment, whatever thus we have spoken of the inviolable Mother Nature or the mother cow, from all that sin and evil, O Varuna, lord of infinite power and mercy, pray save us. 
4828 :O Anjana, Mitra, the man of love and friendship, and Varuna, man of judgement and wisdom, both follow you and your message. Let both of them go far in accordance with your will and law, and when they have gone far enough, let them come back again to enjoy the beauty and pleasure of this life in body. 
4829 :As one strives to make a fugitive debtor pay back the debt or makes an evil deed visit back upon the evil doer in his very home, so O Anjana, lord of the beauty, goodness and beatitude of life, make the evil eye and evil wish to visit back upon the evil eyed and the evil hearted and break his back with the weight of his own doing. 
4830 :Whatever the evil dream of the evil hearted on us, our cows, whatever on our home, let the evil hearted, unknown, un-named, have it, his own dear favourite, visit on him and wear it for himself. 
4831 :Anjanam, augmenting and exalting the food, energy and splendour of the people and their actions, the power bom of the very cosmic fire of existence, potent presence all over the four quarters, vibrating in clouds and over mountains, the Anjana that rolls around may, we pray, make all the four directions and subdirections auspicious for you. 
4832 :O man, the heroic presence of Anjana, divine splendour over the four directions, is love self-bound for your good. So let all the quarters of space be free from hate and fear for you. O noble man, stay strong and stable like the sun and let these people bear and bring homage of loyalty to you. 
4833 :O man, dedicate yourself to the One only, take that One as the jewel of your faith, anoint your-self with the One only. And may the One heroic presence in all the four quarters save and protect us from all calamities of adversity and the paralysing snares of all the four directions. 
4834 :May Agni, leading light of life, save and strengthen me with the light of knowledge for prana, apana, health, energy and full age, for honour and lustre, brilliance, splendour, well being, and prosperity of noble order. This is the prayer and homage in truth of thought, word and deed. 
4835 :May Indra, lord omnipotent, protect and promote me with the vigour and power of sense and mind for prana and apana, health, energy and full age, honour and glory, the glow of inner splendour and brilliance of performance, all round well being, and abundance of prosperity. Homage to Indra in truth of thought, word and deed. 
4836 :May Soma, lord of peace and life’s inspiration, protect and promote me with peace and joyous inspiration for prana and apana, good health and full age, honour and glory, glow of spiritual splendour and brilliance of performance, all round well being and creative prosperity. Homage to Soma in truth of thought, word and deed. 
4837 :May Bhaga, lord of abundant power and prosperity, protect and promote me with power and prosperity for prana and apana, good health and full age, honour, splendour and social brilliance, all round well being and noble fame. Homage to Bhaga in truth of thought, word and deed. 
4838 :May the Maruts, vibrant forces of nature and humanity protect and promote me with their bands of forces for prana and apana, good health and full age, honour, splendour and glory, all round well being and noble prosperity. Homage to Maruts in truth of thought, word and deed. 
4839 :Prajapati, father sustainer of the people, first bound the auspicious Astrta on you for the sake of manly vigour, heroic valour and unfailing strength and power. That I bind on you for the sake of good health and full age, honour and lustre, and unconquerable strength and heroism. And may this unsubdued Astrta mani protect you all round. 
4840 :(Astrta means something unsubdued and unconquerable. Whitney interprets it as an amulet; Vishvanatha Vidyalankara interprets as a bond of agreement between a regional ruler and a super world ruler, Prajapati, the bond being inviolable and all protective; Kshemakaranadasa Trivedi interprets it as the divine law and moral discipline of Prajapati, of which the Yajnopavita, the sacred thread, may be regarded as one symbolic example. The meaning seems open ended and general, depending on the context: in the context of governance, it could be a bond of agreement, in the psychic context, it could be a symbolic amulet, in the religious context it could be the sacred thread, and so on. In Swami Dayananda’s view, ‘Astrta’ means non-violent, friendly inviolable (Rgveda, 1. 41, 6 and 1,15,5). 
4841 :The parties in the mantras are three: Prajapati, the Supreme Lord in whose dispensation Astrta wields inviolable force and power, the man who is the beneficiary, and the guru who vests the man with Astrta.) May Astrta stand high in power, relentlessly protecting the beneficiary. O Astrta, O wearer of Astrta, let no thieves, no selfish bargainers, no demonic forces deceive, subdue and destroy you. Like Indra, shake down all the negative forces, enemies and the challengers, fight out and destroy them all. O beneficiary, may Astrta protect and defend you all round. 
4842 :Not a hundred attackers, not a hundred fatalities can dominate and subdue the man whom Astrta would protect. Into that, Indra, lord omnipotent, has vested far sighted vision, pranic energy, and immense strength. O man, may Astrta protect you all round. 
4843 :O man, we vest and cover you with the power and protection of Indra who is the supreme ruler of the world powers of strength and enlightenment, and then may all brilliant powers of the world protect and lead you forward. O man, may Astrta protect you all round. 
4844 :In this jewel gift of immense power and value, in the Astrta are vested a hundred forms of strength and valour, a thousand pranic energies. O man-tiger, wearer of Astrta, challenge and fight all the enemies. Whoever fights against you must fall down. May Astrta protect you all round. 
4845 :Risen from the fiery flames of ghrta, honey sweet, abundant in food and energy, bearing pranic energies of a thousand forms, giver of peace, harbinger of good fortune and well being, commanding force and power, rich in milk and soma, harbinger of health, energy and life of a hundred orders, may Astrta protect you all round. 
4846 :O man, may Savita, lord of life and living inspiration, inspire and exalt you so that you rise higher and higher free from jealous adversaries, fighting out obstructions of enemies from your path, and be the organiser and controller of your equals with love and respect, and may Astrta protect you all round in your mission of life. 
4847 :The great night comes and covers the regions of the earth and the firmament. Away from the regions of the sun, her progenitor, it stays and eclipses the areas of light, and the darkness remains until the light comes again with the morning. 
4848 :The night is a vast veil of darkness, no end of which is visible, nor anything distinct and separate that recedes from the dark. The whole world that moves in the day enters and lies concealed in it. O Night, vast and deep and dark, surely we would reach beyond the dark, O noble restful harbinger of peace and well being, we would reach, unhurt, unscathed, beyond the dark and attain to the morning light. 
4849 :All these watchful stars of yours who also watch and bless humanity, ninety-nine, eighty-eight, or seventy-seven, all yours... 
4850 :O Night of abundant riches of rest and refreshment, harbinger of peace and well being, overflowing with restorative speed and energy for new victories, all these watchful vigils of yours which are sixty-six, fiftyfive, forty four, or thirty-three, all yours,... 
4851 :O Night, all these watchful vigils of yours which are twentytwo, or eleven, or even less but all youthful and intimate, with all these watchful guarding sentinels, O child of heaven, pray protect and promote us here and now. 
4852 :O Night, pray protect us. Let no sinner rule over us. Let no notorious scandalous power rule over us. Let there be no thief who may rule to steal our cows, let no wolf master and devour our sheep. 
4853 :O noble night of peace and restfulness, let there be no thief to steal our horses, no devilish damagers of our people. Let the thief and robber go farthest far by farthest paths in the distance away. 
4854 :O Night, crush the head of the snake which breathes out dark smoke and doom. Break the jaw of the wolf and kill him in the flight. 
4855 :rest and dream in you, pray you keep awake and be watchful, and bear and bring peace and rest and shelter for our cows, our horses and our people. 
4856 :Those things which we get with effort and we know, and those which we have secured in safety, all those, O Night, we entrust to you. 
4857 :Mother night, deliver us back to the dawn in good health and safety. Let the dawn deliver us to the day and, O splendid Night, may the day deliver us to you. (Let the holy circle of life thus continue.) Whatever it is that flies, all this that creeps, whatever wild ones roam around on the mountain, from May the night protect us from behind, may she protect us from the front, from above and from below. O splendid Night, protect us all round. We here are your admirers, we adore and celebrate you. 
4858 :Those who keep awake by night and practice holy vigil, those who keep awake among living beings while others sleep, and those who guard all the animals, they keep awake in our very souls, they keep awake among our animals. 
4859 :O Night, I know well your name. You are of the name of Ghrtachi, the service ladle for ghrta and generosity for yajna. Bharadvaja, the sagely scholar of food and energy, knows you who watch over and guard our wealth. 
4860 :Inspiring, youthful, Night, friend by shadow of the house of the mighty refulgent sun, instantly coming on sunset bearing her own restful beauty and grace has arrived and pervades and fills the heaven and earth with her greatness and glory. 
4861 :Profound darkness covers all things of the day’s world. Greatest stars ascend on top of the deep and generous vault of heaven. Noble night of exciting splendour abides by its own time like a friend with her own blessed powers of peace and restfulness. 
4862 :Lovable, adorable, generous, nobly born, the night is come. Let us be peaceful at heart at this hour. O night, pray save and protect and promote with strength and growth all that exists for human good and for the good of the animal world. 
4863 :The exciting night has taken over the rumble of the lion’s roar, the stag’s fleetness, the tiger’s growl, the elephant’s peal, the horse’s great perseverance, and man’s challenge. Thus do you, O splendid Night, assume and hold in your unfathomable womb many forms of being and its variety. 
4864 :O mother of peace and cool, be kind and gracious to us. O Spirit of abundance and splendour, know and acknowledge this song of adoration with which, like the sun, I celebrate you, blissful night, pervading in all quarters of space. 
4865 :O night of splendour, you enjoy our song of adoration like a queen. Pray let us all be blest with noble progeny worthy of the brave, let us be masters of all wealth as in unison with the rising dawns of radiance. 
4866 :ttrtt 1 §[ -stfkrfr ttr fcm'Pd srrf i 11 dip hMjh hui ^ nd u vs n Samya ha nama dadhise mama dipsanti ye dhana. Ratrlhi tanasutapb ya steno na vidyate yatpu- narna vidyate. 
4867 :O Night, you bear the name ‘Shamya’, harbinger of peace and rest after exertion and success. Pray go to those who covet my wealth and wish to deceive and deprive me of my wealth, honour and excellence, visit them as tormentor of their mind and life energy so that whoever is a thief may survive but never revive as thief again. 
4868 :O Night, harbinger of peace, satisfaction and joy, you are like a plate full of delicious food, or like a ladle full of ghrta for the holy fire. You thus bear the youthful form of the universal mother cow. Excited with love for us, bearing wondrous body forms and starry eyes, you do not forsake the earth, for our sake. 
4869 :Whoever the thief, the enemy, the man of evil intention and action, that comes now and prowls, may the Night, having known and identified him, catch him by the neck and break his head. 
4870 :g gigf g ggTgfrt g g gsnf^fgg i gf uTh g gigVT ggfgfg i Arrest him by the feet so that he may not prowl any more, arrest him by the hands so that he may not grab the article he wants to steal. Whoever the robber that comes must go away, defeated in purpose, crushed, go away for sure, go far away to a dry, uninhabited land. 
4871 :O Night, crush the head of the snake which breathes out dark smoke of doom. Strike out the eyes of the wolf, and hold him in the snare. 
4872 :O Night, fast and sharp-homed are the bulls of your chariot. By them take us across the dark difficulties of life to the dawn of a new day now and always. 
4873 :Night by night, unhurt, unscathed, let us cross the dark, hale and hearty in body, unlike the indigent and the uncharitable who would not cross the dark and deep without the ark. 
4874 :Just as a tiny grain of Shyamaka, fallen and flown away by wind cannot be retrieved, so O Night, drive away the sinner who wants to hurt and destroy us. 
4875 :Drive off the thief who wants to steal our cow, and the robber who halters the courser’s head and tries to steal it away. 
4876 :O noble and beneficent Night, as you come now giving out wealth and peace to all, pray give us our share to enjoy as you give out theirs to others. 
4877 :O Night, deliver us all, free from sin and evil, back to the dawn. Let the dawn deliver us to the day and the day, O splendid Night, may deliver us back to you. 
4878 :yutam me srotramayuto me prano ’yuto me ’pano yuto me vyano ’yuto ’ham sarvah. 
4879 :I am a complete whole, my soul is complete whole, my eye is complete whole, my ear is complete whole, my prana is complete whole, my apana is complete whole, my vyana is complete whole, I am all, complete, whole, undivided, complete, integrated organismic being. 
4880 :O man, O self, in this yajnic world order of Savita’s creation, with the arms of Ashvins, harbingers of light and knowledge, and with the hands of Pusha, generous powers of health and nourishment, I initiate and consecrate you, nobly born, to begin your holy life as a complete, whole, undivided human being. 
4881 :In the beginning, there was Kama, thought-and- desire, born of the divine mind, and that was the first seed of the world of existence. O Kama, coexistent and one with the infinite mind and potential, pray bring in and bless the yajamana with wealth and nourishment of life. 
4882 :You, Kama, abide with strength and courage, boundless and splendid, a friend of friends, terrible in battle, victorious. Pray bring in and bless the yajamana with strength and courage, lustre and splendour. 
4883 :For man, inspired with desire since farthest time, i.e., eternity, in the imperishable world of Infinity, for his fulfilment in response to his desire, hope and effort, the quarters of space listen and, by the universal desire of Divinity co-existent with the human in the universal mind, they create the joy and bliss of life for him. 
4884 :By Kama, desire and effort, is Kama, hope and ambition, fulfilled, through Kama and dispensation of Divinity. It comes from the heart in response to the heart. May that mind, thought and meditative effort, which was those ancients’ since eternal time, come to me here and now and bless. 
4885 :O Kama, Spirit of love and desire, whatever our hope and ambition for which we offer this homage of effort and havi, may all that hope and ambition be fulfilled. And we pray you accept this homage and be pleased to bless. This in heart-felt truth of word and deed! The ‘Time-courser’ of seven ‘reins’ and thousand eyes, unbound, unaging and omnipotent, carries the cosmic chariot of a thousand wheels at tremendous velocity. Only poetic visionaries and wise sages ride the courser and the chariot. All stars and planets and the worlds of life are the wheels of his chariot on the move. 
4886 :Seven wheels (globes) of whirling worlds does this Time-courser carry. Seven are the naves and axles of this chariot moving on the one axis of Immortal Eternity. He creates and manifests all these worlds of existence. That Time, first, eternal, self-refulgent Divinity, is intensely active, on the move, (and That can be approached but with motionless meditative effort). 
4887 :The universe is a full, complete and perfect vessel settled on Time. That we see becoming and evolving manifold. That which is present upfront before all these worlds of the universe, the sages call ‘Kala’, Time, which extends upto the ultimate, supreme transcendent heaven. 
4888 :He alone bears and sustains all the worlds of existence. He alone transcends all the worlds of existence. He alone, though being the father of all these worlds, becomes his own manifestive begotten child, chronological time form, in the life of these creatures. There is no other, higher refulgence and power beyond him. 
4889 :Kala brought into existence those heavens, and Kala brought these earths into existence. In kala only subsist the past and the future and all that is moved and desired at the present time. 
4890 :Kala created the plenty and prosperity of existence. In Kala does the sun shine and blaze. In Kala do all existing forms subsist, and the eye sees only in Kala. 
4891 :The mind is concentred in Time. Prana is controlled in Time. The name with substance is contained in Time. And all these living beings rejoice with the passage of time. 
4892 :Tapa, austerity of discipline, is concentred in Kala, the highest, first, supreme subsists in Time, in Kala is Brahma concentred and realised. Kala is the supreme ruler and controller of all, the one that is the progenitor of Prajapati, father and sustainer of living beings. 
4893 :Inspired and moved by that Time, the moving world in chrological time is created, manifested and stabilised in Time, Kala alone, having become manifest in the created world, bears the highest existent reality. 
4894 :Kala created the living beings. Kala, is the Beginning, self-manifested, the creator and sustainer functionality of his transcendent Being as Prajapati. From Kala emerged Kashyapa, self-existing witness version of Divine Brahma, and from Kala arose Tapa, self-emergent creative thought and resolution of the Creator. 
4895 :From Kala, in course of time, arose the ‘waters’, the oceans of particles. From Kala arose Brahma, divine Resolution to create, and the quarters of space. By Kala and with time rises the sun and again sets back into Kala. 
4896 :By Kala does the wind blow, by Kala does the great earth move in balance. Both the great heaven and earth exist and subsist in Kala. 
4897 :Kala, transcendent Time, transcendent Brahma, self-created Its own creative version of the creator and chronological time with the divisions of past, present and future. From Kala arose the Rks and Yajus together from Time and in time. 
4898 :Kala sets in motion the cosmic yajna, dynamics of creative evolution, and the creative parts of cosmic dynamics for the divine forces of nature and humanity in the process of evolution and development. In Kala abide the Gandharvas, sustainers of stars and planets, and the Apsaras, fluent forces of the universe. And in Kala abide all regions of the worlds in the universe for created beings. 
4899 :Imam ca lokam paramam ca lokam punyamsca lokanvidhrtisca punydh. Sarvdhllokanabhijitya brahmana kalah sa lyate paramo nu devah. 
4900 :This divine Angira, dynamic fire and pranic energy, and Atharva, constant energy, and this divine sun with its rays, abide in Kala. This earthly region, the highest heavenly region, all auspicious regions, all noble and divine sustainers, indeed all regions of the universe in existence, all these, Kala, having won and held in power by the Supreme Spirit of Brahma, lives on, the ultimate force, refulgent and divine (even when chronogical time and all else is absorbed and still). 
4901 :Just as night after night they bring grass for the horse standing in the stall after the day’s journey, similarly we bring havi to Agni, leading light of life. O Agni, pioneer and leader, may we, your friends and inmates, enjoying ourselves with health, wealth, food and energy, never suffer hurt and loss in life. 
4902 :O Agni, leading light of humanity, giver of peace and settlement, the windy missile that is yours is under your control here. With that, pray give us peace, prosperity and security. O Agni, pioneer and leader, may we, your friends and inmates, enjoying ourselves with health, wealth, food and energy, never suffer hurt and loss in life. 
4903 :Every evening day bt day, may Agni, leader, pioneer and ruler of humanity, be the protector of our home and country. Every morning day by day, may Agni give us peace, happiness and good cheer at heart. O generous Agni, come and be the generous giver of the best of wealth, honour and excellence, and may we, lighting and serving you with homage, grow in body and mind with food, energy and yajnic generosity. 
4904 :pioneer and ruler, be the protector of our home and country. Every evening day by day, may Agni give us peace, happiness and good cheer at heart. O Agni, come and be the generous giver of the best of wealth, honour and excellence, and may we, lighting and serving you with homage, grow and advance for a full hundred years of happy seasons. 
4905 :Let me be rich in the front ranks, not lagging behind, in the possession of ripe food grains. Homage to Rudra Agni, leader, pioneer and ruler, giver and protector of food who shakes down and destroys negative forces. Let the decent and cultured protect and promote the prestige of Sabha, the parliament, for me. Let the members of the Sabha be decent and honourable. 
4906 :May you, Indra, lord ruler and potent protector, universally loved, live full and healthy life. Day by day we bear and bring homage of loyalty to you in office as the groom looks after the war horse of the king. 
4907 :O Dream, you arise from the subconscious state of the mind (below the state of wakefulness and above the state of deep sleep) and, yourself unmoved and unchanging, you join people with the sports of their own mind. Joining them as one with their state, you move with their lone spirit playing in the same sphere of the mind with the same sports as they, structuring further dreams in the life of the dreamer’s mind at work. 
4908 :Some day long before the birth of the dream night, the man bound in fancies conceived you, and collecting his materials from the wide world structured you. Thence, O dream, you thus arise in this form and come, having stolen yourself from the healers. 
4909 :The man of unbounded sense and imagination came from the demonic tendencies close to the divinities in search of greatness and glory. The thirty-three divinities enjoying heavenly bliss and potential blessed him with full mastery over the realisation of his dream. 
4910 :Neither pranas nor the senses and mind of people in whose personality confusion and verbosity prevails reach this mystery of dreams. Only brave men and brilliant scholars of Aditya order taught and trained by Varuna, master of right choice and judgement, concentrate and direct their dream onto the lord of three worlds, lover and saviour of the men of divine attainments. 
4911 :suffering dreamers, whose cruelty the man of evil suffers, and avoiding which the man of noble action enjoys freedom and virtue, you rejoice only with our Brother of the highest heaven in the state of contemplation. 
4912 :We know in advance all your sources and all your attendants and off-shoots, and we know who is your protector and who is your controller here in this human state. Protect and promote those of us with honour and fame who are honourable and famous, and if there be any jealous adversaries and enemies with you, go far away along with them. 
4913 :As people repay one sixteenth and one eighth part and finally discharge the whole debt, so do we discharge all evil dreams and assign them to our All rulers (and all ruling values) have come together (as objects of honour). All debts and obligations have come together (for clearance). All Kushtha herbs have come together (for our health and happiness). All digits of the moon have come together (for light against the dark). Let all evil dreams in us come together and let us put all those evil dreams aside and assign them to that part of our value system which we dislike and reject as totally negative. 
4914 :O Dream, you are a product of the supportive powers of senses and mind. You are a gift of the hand of the subconscious reflection of the discipline of yama and niyama which is auspicious. But that dream of ours which is evil, we cast away as an object of hate and rejection. As a black omen of misfortune, you are no O Dream, we know you as you are. Therefore, as a horse shakes its body to get rid of dust or a burden on the back, you throw off the dream which is not our love, which is hurtful to our mind and senses, and which vitiates our soul. Throw off all evil dreams of ours about our cows, our home and our family. Uproot that. 
4915 :Let him who is not ours, who hurts the divines, who is mischievous, own and wear the evil dream as gold. Throw away the evil dream nine cubits far from where we are. We throw out all evil dreams for that part of our value system which we hate and reject. 
4916 :Let the flow and flame of ghrta with heartfelt love, divine inspiration and havi augment and beautify the yearly session of yajna. May our ear, eyes, prana be whole and unhurt. Let us be whole and unhurt by health and full age with honour and excellence. 
4917 :Let prana call us up and energise us. Let us invoke and awake the pranic energy by yajna. The earth has worn the lustre of energy and divinity. The firmament wears lustre. Soma, the moon, wears lustre. Brhaspati, the sun, wielder and sustainer, wears the lustre and light of cosmic yajna. 
4918 :May the earth and heaven be gatherers of lustre and grandeur (from Brhaspati). May we, having received lustre and grandeur (from the earth and the heavens) range around on earth, happy and great. May the cows coming in sit by the master and share his lustre and grandeur with food. And may we too receive good food and lustre and live happy on earth. 
4919 :Establish and develop dairy farms, that is the way for your growth and national health. Design and manufacture many broad and thick armours of defence. Build strong unbreakable forts of steel. And see that your ladle of the yajna of social order, i.e. economy of the nation, does not leak anywhere. Keep it strong and increase its capacity. 
4920 :With sincerity of word, ear and mind I invoke, adore and offer oblations of homage to Vishvakarma, the vision and visionary of the cosmic yajna, its initiator, augmentor, and the spokes person of its divine knowledge. Let all divinities of nature and brilliancies of humanity, happy at heart, come, join and benefit from this cosmic yajna enacted and extended by Vishvakarma. 
4921 :Those among the divinities, the learned, the brilliant, who are dedicated to yajna all the year round with the seasons, who are adorable, and for whom the yajna is enacted and the share of holy offerings is fixed and reserved, may all those divinities with their supportive powers come to yajna, wax with strength and satisfaction and celebrate yajna with joy and ecstasy, and give us happiness. 
4922 :Hey Agni, supreme leading light of life, lord self-refulgent, you are the observer and protector of the vows of discipline among mortal humanity, and you are the lord adorable in yajna on earth and in the universe. 
4923 :O Devas, divinities of nature and brilliant sages of humanity, if we, because of our limited knowledge and relative ignorance among the learned, fall short of your discipline or transgress your laws, then, we pray, may Agni, lord self-refulgent, all leading light, sustainer of the world, omniscient lord of Soma, peace of life and pleasure of love and devotion, make up that mortal deficiency, the lord that blesses the heart of the lovers of Brahma within and fulfils their love. 
4924 :(The mantra emphasises the divine acceptance of sincere love and devotion over mortal limitations and human trespasses.) Let us take to and follow the path of the Devas, divinities of nature and brilliant sages of humanity as far as we can, possibly, and relentlessly maintain that effort with faith and sincerity. May Agni, lord self- refulgent, give us strength and make thatpossible : He is the sole initiation and high priest of all yajnas of love, faith and non-violence. He ordains the yajnic seasons, and He fulfils all of them. 
4925 :Let there be speech in my mouth, prana energy in my nostrils, vision in my eyes and hearing in my ears. Let my hair be not white, let my teeth be firm, let there be great strength in my arms. 
4926 :Let there be virility in my thighs, smartness and speed in the legs, balance and firmness in my personality, let all my body parts and systems be unhurt and healthy, and may my soul be ever pure, unsullied and unfallen. 
4927 :May my body be strong with all my systems and pranic, psychic and intellectual potentials perfect so that I can face, challenge and forbear all forces against me and live a full life to the full capacity. O lord Brahmanaspati, be kind and gracious to my soul within, raise me to the full in abundance, purifying, sanctifying and edifying me for heavenly bliss. 
4928 :to u t %^l T f fy ^ TT^fcr ITT I ■ftjzr J-lcf't^i ■q^l L ?T ^rTTghl ^ II O lord, make me dear to all divines and brilliant people, make me dear to all brilliant ruling leaders, make me dear favourite of all who can see and discriminate, dear to all whether they are nobles or poor dependants or sub servients. 
4929 :Rise, O Brahmanaspati, lord of divine knowledge, arouse the Devas, nobles and brilliants with yajna, and promote health and age, prana energy, people and progeny, wealth and cattle, honour and fame, and thus promote the yajamana. 
4930 :O leading light of life, Agni, I have collected and brought the samits for the service of boundless Jataveda, all pervading divine energy and cosmic awareness. May that universal energy and awareness bless me with faith and intelligence. 
4931 :O Jataveda, omnipresent fire, we raise you and your presence in us, kindling and feeding you with faith and fuel. So, pray you too promote and advance us with wealth and progeny. 
4932 :O Agni, most youthful presence, whatever fuel sticks we can collect and offer in faith and service, pray accept and bless that all that may be good for us. 
4933 :O leading light, Agni, these are the fuel offerings we present to you. Thereby be lighted and enlighten us. Bear and bring life, health and full age for us, bless us with that, and bring us the light of immortality, for us and for the teacher. 
4934 :O Reliever of discomfort and pain, ‘Celestial Bird’, O Sun, Jataveda, with your blazing light, you have risen to the heavens. Those who obstruct you while you fly up and rise to the heavens, strike down with your heat and passion. O Jataveda, Universal light, bright and blazing, rise on and on to the heavens, with light, without fear. 
4935 :Whoever the obstructionists with nets of steel, evil-minded sourcerers who prowl around with arrestive snares, all these I stop, O Jataveda, with your power and passion. O power of a thousand spears, wielder of the thunderbolt, protect and promote us, crushing the adversaries to dust. 
4936 :May we fully think on for a hundred years. fn&T^TRf: TORJI 'X II May we rise on and on for a hundred years. WR II II May we live on in full state of being for a hundred years. 
4937 :With noble intelligence, I penetrate the mystery of the bounded and the boundless reality of matter, soul and Supersoul, and with these two, having opened, seen, and confirmed the Veda, we do our actions. 
4938 :Live, live well, full of life. I must live fully. I will live fully for the whole of my life, (i.e., live life as a boon, and not as a sufferance). 
4939 :Live on close to one another. Let me live my life as a boon. Let me live my life close to others for the full life. 
4940 :Live, and live together. Let me live together with all. Let me live with all together for the whole of life. 
4941 :Live, be living, animated and inspiring. Let me live with enthusiasm. Let me live, inspired, inspiring, throughout life till the last day of a full life. 
4942 :Indra, Great soul, live, keep living, O Sunny soul, live, keep living well, O Divine Souls, live bright. Let me live bright, a divine soul. I must live fully, wholly, brilliant, divine. 
4943 :Honoured, celebrated and worshipped by me is Mother Knowledge, Veda, purifier, sanctifier and inspirer of the inspired and inspiring Dvijas, enlightened men of culture, education and piety, the Mother who, having given me good health, full age, prana, progeny, wealth, honour and fame, substantial power and stability, and the light and lustre of Divinity, retires to Brahma- loka, the Eternal Mind of Brahma. 
4944 :From the Treasure-hold of Divinity we received with elation the Mother Knowledge of Veda. Having worshipped and celebrated her, we return her unto the same Treasure-hold. Whatever was desired and desirable has been accomplished by the might and grace of Brahma. 
4945 :O Devas, enlightened divines, teachers and seniors, by that very discipline of piety and austerity, pray protect and promote us here in life. 
4946 :In this soma-yajna of the creative business of life when the time is ripe, O lord of honour and majesty, Indra, we invoke and invite you, lord of bliss, mighty brave and generous as rain showers. Come, grace the yajna, and protect and promote the honey sweets of food, energy and the joy of life. 
4947 :Maruts, dear as the breath of life, bright as the light of heaven, agents of great and adorable action, the person whose house you visit and bless with protection grows to be the most secure and meritorious person. 
4948 :With songs of adoration, let us offer honour and worship to Agni and develop the science of fire and energy which provides life and sustenance to the Cow and the Sun and all dependent forms of life in existence and bears and brings the soma of health and joy for all. 
4949 :Let the leader of the Maruts, stormy warriors, drink the soma from the Maruts’ holy vessel sanctified by the chant of sacred Rks, in accordance with the seasons. (Soma should be interpreted as service, love, loyalty and devotional honour and adoration in perfect faith with total submission which, on the master’s part, would imply love and protection in response.) Let Agni, leading light of life, accept some from the Agnidhra’s, fire kindler’s, holy vessel of the heart sanctified by the chant of sacred Rks, in accordance with the seasons. 
4950 :Let Indra Brahma, the presiding priest of yajna accept soma from the holy vessel of the sagely vedic scholar’s heart sanctified by the chant of sacred Rks, in accordance with the seasons. 
4951 :Let the divine, brilliant and generous Dravinoda, producer and giver of substantial wealth, accept soma from the holy vessel of the pure heart’s love sanctified by the chant of sacred Rks, in accordance with the seasons. 
4952 :Indra, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, we hold the yajna and distil the soma of life in your service. Come, grace this holy seat of my yajna dedicated to you, watch my performance, enjoy the soma, and protect and promote the yajna for the beauty and joy of life. 
4953 :Let the radiant waves of cosmic energy engaged in the service of divinity bring you here. Pray listen to our songs of prayer and adoration. 
4954 :Dedicated to divinity and the divine voice, meditating on the divine presence with concentrated mind and soul, living in truth the beauty of life and expressing the ecstasy of soma, we invoke and wait for Indra, original maker and lover of soma, to come and bless us. 
4955 :O lord of cosmic beauty, come to us, listen to our song of adoration and drink of the soma distilled by us with intense love and devotion. 
4956 :I create and pour the soma into the body spaces of your creation, taste the sweets with your tongue and let the exhilaration of honey radiate to every cell of the cosmic body. 
4957 :May the soma be delicious to your taste, O connoisseur of soma, may the honey sweets be exhilarating to your body, and may the soma bring peace and joy to your heart. 
4958 :O lord of cosmic vision, let this soma distilled and seasoned radiate to you from sense to the spirit, inspiring, soothing and beatifying like a bride on top of her beauty and virgin grace. 
4959 :In the ecstasy and exhilaration of soma, Indra, lord mighty of head and arms joined at the neck and vast of cosmic belly space, destroys the dark forces of life. 
4960 :Indra, ruler and ordainer of the world by your power and splendour, come to us and, O dispeller of darkness, go forward, destroy the evils and adversities of ignorance, injustice and poverty. 
4961 :Let your arms of law and order be long and far reaching by which you protect and provide peace, prosperity and security for the self-sacrificing performer of yajna who creates soma for the common good. 
4962 :Indra, this soma pure and sanctified on the holy grass of yajna vedi, is dedicated to you. Come fast, you would love it, drink and enjoy, and protect and promote Lord self-refulgent creator of stars and planets, glorious adorable, this cosmic soma of the universe of your creation is for the joy of life. Therefore, O lord imperishable, you are invoked and adored with love and faith. 
4963 :O lord, the sun on high which neither falls nor allows others, planets and satellites, to fall is your creation and it is the protector and sustainer of the vault of heaven and the firmament. On this we meditate and concentrate our mind. 
4964 :In this soma-yajna of the creative business of life when the time is ripe, O lord of honour and majesty, Indra, we invoke and invite you, lord of bliss, mighty brave and generous as rain showers. Come, grace the yajna, and protect and promote the honey sweets of food, energy and the joy of life. 
4965 :Indra, lover of life and excellence, sung and celebrated by many, cherish the nectar-sweet of soma distilled and inspiring for the completion of yajna. Drink of the delight of life to the lees, to your heart’s content, grow strong and vigorous, and shower the blessings of Divinity on the celebrants. 
4966 :Indra, lord of might and majesty, ruler and protector of the people, celebrated defender of truth and rectitude, destroyer of darkness and evil, come with all the nobilities of humanity and promote and perfect this yajna of ours so that it overflows with the bounties of life and nature for all. 
4967 :Indra, lord of knowledge, protector of truth and lover of rectitude, all these soma essences of nature, distilled, seasoned and reinforced, soothing sweet and inspiring, trickling in drops and flowing in streams, come to your abode. 
4968 :Indra, lover of life and health a long age, the soma distilled drop by drop in sunlight is selected for you. Take it, bear it in the stomach, and it will give you the vigour and joy of a full life. 
4969 :Indra, lord of honour, excellence and majesty, honoured by songs of celebration, served and pleased with streams of sweet soma in homage, pray protect and promote our soma-yajna of life and endeavour. By you alone is acknowledged the honour, joy and value of life and karma. 
4970 :Seekers and celebrants, serve Indra and pray for honour, excellence and prosperity of imperishable value, and as I drink of the soma of his grace, so he too waxes in divine joy as he accepts our homage. 
4971 :Indra, lord destroyer of the clouds of darkness, giver of the showers of joy and prosperity, come to us, dynamic celebrants of life and divinity, come from far and near, receive, acknowledge and cherish these songs of ours offered in homage. 
4972 :Indra, lord giver of prosperity, invoked from within, from far and from near, come from there, anywhere, take us and bless us with grace. 
4973 :O Surya, self-refulgent light of the world, you rise and move in the service of Indra, lord of the wealth of revelation, generous and virile, lover of humanity and dispeller of the darkness and negativities of the mind, soul and the universe. 
4974 :(Indra is interpreted in this Sukta as the omnipotent, self-refulgent lord and light of the universe, as the sublime soul, and as the enlightened mind according to the context of meaning reflected by the intra-structure of the mantra.) Indra who breaks off the nine and ninty strongholds of darkness, ignorance and suffering by the force of his lustrous arms and, as the dispeller of darkness, destroys the crooked serpentine evil of the world: That same Indra who is blissful, a gracious friend and companion, commands the wealth of cows and horses, nourishment and achievement, knowledge and enlightenment and distils for us power, honour and excellence from nature such as the torrential showers of rain. 
4975 :Indra, lover of life and excellence, sung and celebrated by many, cherish the nectar-sweet of soma distilled and inspiring for the completion of yajna. Drink of the delight of life to the lees, to your heart’s content, grow strong and vigorous, and shower the blessings of divinity on the celebrants. 
4976 :Thus protect and promote life and humanity as ever before, and let the adventure give you the pride of pleasure. Listen to the Veda, protect the Word of knowledge, and be exalted by our songs of celebration. Uncover the light of the sun, enjoy food and drink, destroy the hostilities, release the speech of humanity to freedom, and unshackle the lands from bondage into liberty. 
4977 :Indra, come right here and now. They say you love soma. Distilled is the soma of life’s joy, drink of it to your fill for the bliss of life. Lord of great honour and universal reverence, invoked by all with love in faith, listen to our prayers as father and shower the rains of bliss. 
4978 :Full to the brim is the cup of life for Indra to drink, filled with the best of thought, perception and action, like the dense cloud of vapours poured in by the sun. Dear friends and admirers, lovers of the soma-joy of life, come close and stand round Indra in homage to join and celebrate the Lord’s gift of life. 
4979 :We invoke and call upon Indra eagerly as cows call for their calves in the stalls, and with songs of adoration over night and day we glorify him, lord glorious, omnipotent power fighting for truth against evil forces, and exhilarated with the bright soma of worship offered by celebrant humanity. 
4980 :We pray to Indra, lord of light, omnificent, hallowed with heavenly glory, universally generous like clouds of shower, and we ask for food abounding in strength and nourishment and for hundredfold and thousandfold wealth and prosperity abounding in lands, cows and the graces of literature and culture, and we pray for the gift instantly. 
4981 :O Lord resplendent, I come to you and ask for that vigour and wisdom, that knowledge of reality and divinity, that prime acquisition and awareness of values by which, when the battle rages and money and materials are called for, you provide for the retired holy men, scientists, technologists and the inventors and by which Indra, lord omnipotent of creation, I pray for the knowledge and experience of that overwhelming power and potential of yours by which you create the mighty waters and the oceans to roll and flow. That mighty power of this lord is not easily to be realised, the heaven and earth obey it, and when they move they celebrate it in the roaring and resounding music of stars and spheres. 
4982 :The sweetest of honeyed songs of praise and vibrations of homage rise to you flying like victorious, unviolated and invincible chariots laden with gold heading for higher destinations. 
4983 :Brilliant scholars and sages as well as brave heroes of the human nation and loving and intelligent citizens of the land, praising and exalting Indra in one vaulting voice, rise and reach the presence of the lord in a world their own like rays of the sun filling the world of space they know. 
4984 :Indra, lord ruler of the world, overcomes the hostile forces with light and thought and the power of persuasion. He opens and expands the cities bound in the dark and, abundant and charitable as he is, relieves and rehabilitates the helpless poor. Inspired by divinity and universal vision, rising and expanding in body and mind with plenty and prosperity, merciful and freely giving, he fills both heaven and earth with light and joy. 
4985 :Indra, lord of life and giver of light, I arise and receive the inspiration of the power and generosity of your yajna, glorifying the divine voice for the sake of immortality. Lord of power and ruler of the world, you are the leader and pioneer of the nations of the world, ordinary people, specialized groups and exceptional people of brilliance and generosity. 
4986 :Indra, heroic warrior of exploits, master of tactics, overwhelms the demon of darkness and, passionate for action, counters the magical moves of the crafty enemies and overthrows the crippled monster. Thus does he set free the cows confined in the forests, voices suppressed in silence, and the streams of water locked up in the cloud and sunrays. 
4987 :Indra, lord of the showers of joy, reveals and brightens the days, fights the battles alongwith his commandos, and comes out victorious. May he then unfurl the flag of the day’s light and victory and win the light for the mighty battle of life as a whole in the Indra, like a manly hero, commanding, overwhelming, the forces of battle, blazing with the mighty thunderbolt, breaks through the thick of enemy lines. He enlightens these thoughts and minds for the celebrant and augments this pure and unsullied light of these within. 
4988 :Many great and good acts of this mighty Indra, ruler and warrior, are worthy of admiration. Lord of might and splendour, hero of victory, he crushes the guiles and evils of the wicked with his strength, and eliminates the thieves and robbers of society by the force of his tactics and intelligence. 
4989 :Indra, lover and favourite of humanity, protector and promoter of truth, reality and the good people, with his fight and force of strength and intelligence does great good deeds for the noble powers of nature and humanity. And those great exploits of his, brilliant poets and scholars celebrate with their songs of homage, the waves and echoes of which rise and resound in the house of the sun. 
4990 :People of intelligence, patience and intelligence may please and share the pleasure with Indra, lord of the world, who upholds truth and challenges untruth, who is worthy of choice, giver of strength and courage, who distinguishes between good and evil, and gives happiness, pranic energy and divine bliss, and who creates, gives and shares the gifts and beauty of this earth and heaven with us. 
4991 :Indra gives us the horses and other modes of fast travel. He gives us the sun and enlightenment. He gives us the cow for milk, land and speech, and golden wealth for the sustenance of all. He destroys evil and the wicked and protects the good and virtuous people for the joy of all. 
4992 :Indra gives us herbs and tonics everyday. He gives us waters of the firmament. He opens up the sources of strength and energy. He stimulates the organs of speech and inspires articulation and the growth of various languages. And he is the controller of the men of impetuous action to a steady state of balance in thought and will. 
4993 :We invoke, invite and celebrate Indra, auspicious lord of wealth, honour and excellence, friend of the good and controller of the wicked. In this battle of life, we call upon him, best and highest of men and leaders, for victory. We call upon him in all our struggles for protection, promotion and progress, for he listens to us, destroys the evils of darkness and ignorance, and wins, preserves and promotes the wealth, honour and excellence of life and culture. Great is he, mighty O brilliant sage of divine vision settled in peace, raise your voice and sing songs of celebration in honour of Indra, mighty ruler of the world. In the battle business of life, glorify him who pervades the wide worlds by his might, and as I approach him he listens close by so that my words of prayer reverberate across the spaces. 
4994 :I come, lord Indra, the sound of prayer rises like a battle cry with the divine waves of nature, charming, mastering, the notes resounding in the tumultuous roar. No one knows the thread of his span of life in humanity. O lord, cleanse us of those sins which pollute us to darkness. 
4995 :I ride the chariot of worship in pursuit of the light of truth, harnessing the two carriers of mind and intellect alongwith the senses. My prayers reach the lord of love who accepts the supplicant with grace. The lord pervades both heaven and earth with his might, prevents evil, and destroys the demons of sin and darkness which we cannot even perceive with our human eyes of ordinary vision. 
4996 :Indra, lord of light and action, just as waters flow and rays of light radiate over darkness, so let your celebrants, men of holy action, rise and attain to the light of truth. O lord of the cosmic chariot, come like the wind to your servants of action with grace since you bless us with mercy and with gifts of intelligence, vision and the light of divinity. 
4997 :Indra, lord of might, mercy, magnanimity and giver of all round success, may the devotees blest with joy and vision of action win your pleasure and favour for the gift of strength and power, sure success and excellence in all fields to bless the celebrant. You, the one adorable lord, bless the mortals with love and mercy. Come and share our celebrations of yajnic ecstasy with us in this session. 
4998 :Thus do brilliant poets of vision and heroes of action settled and settlers at peace with homage and adorations celebrate Indra, lord ruler and commander of world forces, giver of showers of joy and wielder of thunder arms for the world order. The lord commands forces of the youthful brave and prosperity of the world’s commonwealth. Praised and celebrated thus, may the lord protect and promote us. O lord, O men of vision and potent action, protect and promote us all time with all modes of happiness and well being. 
4999 :Dynamic guardian of the path of rectitude to the last, wielder of thunder, generously brave, breaker of tempestuous missiles instantly, terribly forceful, refulgent ruler and sovereign commander, destroyer of the darkest enemies and protector of peaceful prosperity and joy of the people, Indra comes post haste by fastest horses, and at the noon day session of yajna joins the celebrations of the nation’s honour and excellence. 
5000 :Brhaspati, master of the knowledge of omniscience, and Indra, lord ruler of the world, both rejoicing and giving showers of wealth and comfort to the people, drink the soma of bliss in this yajna of human excellence. O lords of glory in your own right, may the majesty and sublimity of divinity bless you both and may you create and give us the wealth and honour of a brave and perfect nation with a brave young generation. 
5001 :Maruts, may superfast vehicles transport you here and everywhere. May the flying planes at top speed take you anywhere by the force of their arms. Come, the chamber is made ready for you. Come and be comfortable in the seats. Enjoy yourselves with honey sweets of food and drink. 
5002 :This song of celebration and worship in honour of venerable Jataveda, Agni, omnipresent in the created world and lord omniscient, we sing in praise of his glory with our mind and soul in sincerity and offer it to him as a joyous holiday chariot fit for his majesty. Blessed is our mind in his company, while we sit in the assembly of devotees. 
5003 :Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may we never come to suffering while we enjoy your company and friendship. 
5004 :With these devas, come hither to us, Agni, Spirit of light and fire, knowledge and power and the ecstasy of life, come by one chariot or many. Exalted and omnipresent and expansive are your beams of light which transport your chariot over the quarters of space. Bring along the thirty-three devas, divinities of nature and spirit, all bountiful, with all their virtues and attributes and rejoice in the beauty of life with us. 
5005 :O lord sublime, eternal, first and most excellent, we, bearing almost nothing substantial but praying for protection and advancement, invoke you in our battle of life for food, energy, knowledge and ultimate victory. 
5006 :We approach you for protection and success in every undertaking. O lord youthful and blazing brave who can challenge and subdue any difficulty, pray come to our help. Indra, friends and admirers of yours, we depend on you alone as our sole saviour and victorious lord and choose to pray to you only as the lord supreme. 
5007 :O friends, for the peace, freedom, progress and protection of you all, I pray to the same Indra, Lord Almighty, who has provided this beautiful world of joy for us since the very time of creation. 
5008 :Haryasvam satpatim carsamsaham sa hi smd yo amandata. A tu nah sa vayati gavyamasvyam stotrbhyo maghava satam. 
5009 :He alone is happy indeed and prospers who glorifies Indra, lord of the moving universe, protector and promoter of truth and reality and ruler and justicier of humanity, who, Lord Almighty, weaves for us this web of a hundredfold variety of earthly provision and all attainable possibility for the celebrants. 
5010 :To the most generous lord of the world, Indra, great, awfully wealthy, truly fragrant, blissful, and mighty strong, I offer my homage of faith and celebration. His universal gift of wealth, knowledge and efficiency of karma, released and open to all for strength and enlightenment, flows freely like streams of water rushing down to the sea. 
5011 :Just as the golden glorious thunderbolt of Indra struck at the cloud reaches to the heart of the vapours and the treasure streams of water flow down to the sea, so may the fruits of the holy works of yajnic people and the wealth of the world flow to you like streams of water for your fulfilment and freedom. (The ruler is the nation’s centre and chief yajamana of the nation’s yajnic activity.) O man of knowledge, come to the auspicious yajna like the glorious dawn, bearing gifts of food, power and energy for this awful lord of majesty and charity, whose house, famous for gold and chant of the Word, emanates the light and power of science and knowledge like the spaces in the morning reflecting the light and glory of the dawn. 
5012 :These are yours, Indra, we are yours, O lord praised and celebrated by all. Beginning with you we go about the business of living, lord of existence and shelter of life. Other than you there is no one else, Lord of holy Word, who would listen to our prayer. Hear our prayer as the voice of earth and humanity and respond with grace. 
5013 :Great is your power and splendour, Indra. We are yours, under your law and shelter. Lord of glory, listen to this devotee and grant his prayer. The vast heaven acknowledges and celebrates your power and glory. This earth too does homage to your might and grandeur. 
5014 :Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, you break that mountainous cloud of vast dimensions part by part with the thunderbolt of lightning energy. You release the held up waters for downward flow in the streams. Eternal and absolute lord of omnipotence, you alone wield and sustain the universe and universal energy. 
5015 :Like aquatic birds playing on water, like watchful guards raising their voice, like the rolling rumble of rain clouds, like rippling streams flowing down mountain slopes, the celebrants raise their hymns of adoration to Brhaspati. 1. Like aquatic birds playing on water, like watchful guards raising their voice, like the rolling rumble of rain clouds, like rippling streams flowing down mountain slopes, the celebrants raise their hymns of adoration to Brhaspati. 
5016 :Just as Angirasa, enlightened disciple of the sage of living knowledge, as Bhaga, divine lord of light and grandeur, leads his friend to knowledge and prosperity, as a friend leads a couple in the community to come together in marriage, so O Brhaspati, inspire and energise the aspirants to go forward and win their goal by the light and words of divinity.2. Just as Angirasa, enlightened disciple of the sage of living knowledge, like Bhaga, divine lord of light and grandeur, leads his friend to knowledge and prosperity, as a friend leads a couple in the community to come together in marriage, so O Brhaspati, inspire and energise the aspirants to go forward and win their goal by the light and words of divinity. 
5017 :Replete with pure, living energy, ever on the move, loved, coveted, brilliant golden, beautiful in form, such are the rays of light and vitality which Brhaspati, the sun, recovers from the deep caverns of darkness and sends them down to clouds and earth as a farmer sows the seeds of barley in the field. 3. Replete with pure, living energy, ever on the move, loved, coveted, brilliant golden, beautiful in form, such are the rays of light and vitality which Brhaspati, the sun, recovers from the deep caverns of darkness and sends them down to clouds and earth as a farmer sows the seeds of barley in the field. 
5018 :Sprinkling the womb of life with honey sweets of vitality like the sun radiating the rays of light from the regions of heaven, Brhaspati recovers the showers of life from the clouds and, as showers of water seep into the crust of earth, so the seeds of life are vested and borne in the earth. Sprinkling the womb of life with the honey sweets of vitality like the sun radiating the rays of light from the regions of heaven, Brhaspati recovers the showers of life from the clouds and, as showers of water seep into the crust of earth, so the seeds of life are vested and borne in the earth. 
5019 :As the sun removes darkness with light from the middle regions, as the wind removes the cover of moss and grass from the surface of water, so does Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, with deep thought, remove the cover of the darkness of nescience and sets in motion the dynamics of nature’s creativity in circuits of energy as the motions of the wind.5. As the sun removes darkness with light from the middle regions, as the wind removes the cover of moss and grass from the surface of water, so does Brhaspati, lord of the expansive universe, with deep thought, remove the cover of the darkness of nescience and sets in motion the dynamics of nature’s creativity in circuits of energy as the motions of the wind. 
5020 :When Brhaspati, with the flames of fire and rays of the light of his creative will, breaks through the darkness of nescience covering the primeval potential existence and takes it over as the tongue takes over the food crushed by teeth, then he opens up and reveals the vast reservoir of his energies of the dynamics of creative nature.6. When Brhaspati with the flames of fire and rays of the light of his creative will breaks through the darkness of nescience covering the primeval potential existence and takes it over as the tongue takes over the food crushed by teeth, then he opens up and reveals the vast reservoir of his energies of the dynamics of creative nature. 
5021 :Brhaspati knows the name and identity of these voluble facts and processes of existence which are present but hidden in the deep womb of nature and which, radiating like rays of light and flowing like streams, grow and come into being as chicks on maturity break the bird’s egg and spring into full life.7. Brhaspati knows the name and identity of these voluble facts and processes of existence which are present but hidden in the deep womb of nature and which, radiating like rays of light and flowing like streams, grow and come into being as chicks on maturity break the bird’s egg and spring into full life. 
5022 :human life caught up in the bonds of pleasure and sufferance in the body like a fish caught up in shallow waters, and he raises and refines it like a cup of soma for the divinities, crafted from rough wood, having refined and blest it by the resounding voice of revelation. 8. Brhaspati sees the sweetness and beauty of human life caught up in the bonds of pleasure and sufferance in the body like a fish caught up in shallow waters, and he raises and refines it like a cup of soma for the divinities, crafted from rough wood, having refined and blest it by the resounding voice of revelation. 
5023 :The blessed man realises the light of the dawn of knowledge, the light and bliss of heaven, the vision of refulgent divinity, and with that light wards off the darkness of evil and ignorance. Indeed, Brhaspati raises the man subjected to body, senses and mind, now blest with divine vision like a real man, otherwise completely sinking in the depths of darkness and evil.9. The blessed man realises the light of the dawn of knowledge, the light and bliss of heaven, the vision of refulgent divinity, and with that light wards off the darkness of evil and ignorance. Indeed, Brhaspati raises the man subject to body, senses and mind, now blest with divine vision like a real man, otherwise completely sinking in the depths of darkness and evil. 
5024 :Just as the leaves of forest trees are made to fall by winter, so darkness is dispelled and light is created, so is ignorance dispelled and the light of Vedic revelation revealed by Brhaspati, and that is an act he does unparalleled and unrepeated as long as the sun and moon shine together and illuminate the days and nights. 10. Just as the leaves of forest trees are made to fall by winter, so darkness is dispelled and light is created, so is ignorance dispelled and the light of Vedic revelation revealed by Brhaspati, and that is an act he does unparallelled and unrepeated as long as the sun and moon shine together and illuminate the days and nights. 
5025 :Like a dark horse adorned with golden trappings, the rays of light adorn the heavens with stars. Brhaspati vests darkness in the night and light in the day, breaks the cloud, releases the light and showers recovering the light of existence from the night of annihilation, and enlightens the heart of darkness with revelations of the light of Divinity. 11. Like a dark horse adorned with golden trappings, the rays of light adorn the heavens with stars. Brhaspati vests darkness in the night and light in the day, breaks the cloud, releases the light and showers recovering the light of existence from the night of annihilation, and enlightens the heart of darkness with revelations of the light of divinity. 
5026 :This homage we offer to Brhaspati, lord of living waters and thunder, who reveals the eternal words of divine knowledge. May that lord bless us with good health and long age with lands, cows and the light of knowledge, horses, transport and advancement, brave progeny, leading lights and enlightened people. 
5027 :All my thoughts, words and actions, all together in perfect unison concentrated on the love and light of divinity, ecstatically adore and celebrate Indra, Lord Almighty of existence. Just as wives with love embrace their human lover, protector and husband, so do my prayers centre on Indra, lord of glory, power and purity, for all round protection, promotion and well being. 1. All my thoughts, words and actions, all together in perfect unison concentrated on the love and light of divinity, ecstatically adore and celebrate Indra, lord almighty of existence. Just as wives with love embrace their human lover, protector and husband, so do my prayers centre on Indra, lord of glory, power and purity, for all round protection, promotion and well being. 
5028 :Indra, lord universally invoked and celebrated, may my mind and soul having surrendered its love and ambition to you, never go astray from the presence such as yours. O lord beatific and glorious, you abide on my vedi and in my heart as the sovereign ruling presence. May your divine love, joy and protection ever abide in this mind and soul and bless it with peace and joy in your presence.2. Indra, lord universally invoked and celebrated, may my mind and soul having surrendered its love and ambition to you, never go astray from the presence such as yours. O lord beatific and glorious, you abide on my vedi and in my heart as the sovereign ruling presence. May your divine love, joy and protection ever abide in this mind and soul and bless it with peace and joy in your presence. 
5029 :Indra, lord of all power and glory, dynamic presence all round in the world, dispels hunger and ignorance, he rules and dispenses wealth, power and peace of shelter and settlement. Indeed, under the rule of this mighty generous master, all these seven streams of nature, life and living energy flow on and evolve to perfection. (This is true of both the external world of nature under the law of the cosmic spirit and of the internal world of mind and pranic energy under the will of the spirit within.)3. Indra, lord of all power and glory, dynamic presence all round in the world, dispels hunger and ignorance, rules and dispenses wealth, power and peace of shelter and settlement. Indeed, under the rule of this mighty generous master, all these seven streams of nature, life and living energy flow on and evolve to perfection. (This is true of both the external world of nature under the law of the cosmic spirit and of the internal world of mind and pranic energy under the rule of the spirit within.) Just as birds take to the tree of rich foliage for rest and replenishment of life energy, so does the soma cheer and energy of the sevenfold fluent streams of cosmic and individual systems take to Indra, the soul, for life and peace and joy. Then the expressive face of these shines with the splendour of Indra, and thus the living light of divinity descends in showers for the bliss of man. Just as birds take to the tree of rich foliage for rest and replenishment of life energy, so the soma cheer and energy of the sevenfold fluent streams of cosmic and individual systems take to Indra, the soul, for life and peace and joy. Then the expressive face of these shines with the splendour of Indra, and thus the living light of divinity descends in showers for the bliss of man. 
5030 :Just as a player in the game casts the die and wins and piles up his gains, so does Indra, lord omnipotent and omnificent, in this pleasure garden of the dynamics of existence, win over the sun and the rain bearing cloud. O Lord Almighty, no one else can possibly equal your might, no one old or new. Just as a player in the game casts the die and wins and piles up his gains, so does Indra, lord omnipotent and omnificent, in this pleasure garden of the dynamics of existence win over the sun and the rain bearing cloud. O lord almighty, no one else can possibly equal your might, no one old or new. 
5031 :The Lord of glory abides with all people of the world whosoever they be. The generous lord knows, listens and grants all prayers of the people. Whosoever the devotee whose yajnas the mighty one joins and enjoys, that celebrant wins over all his rivals and adversaries by the power of his ardent soma offerings of holy action in yajna. The lord of glory abides with all people of the world whosoever they be. The generous lord knows, listens and grants all prayers of the people. Whosoever the devotee whose yajnas the mighty one joins and enjoys, that celebrant wins over all his rivals and adversaries by the power of his ardent soma offerings of holy action in yajna. 
5032 :As rivers flow into the sea, as streams of rain flow into the lake, so do the beauties of faith and pleasure in soma yajnas concentrate on Indra, glory of the world. As showers of rain with profuse divine generosity raise the crops of barley and the plants grow up in ecstasy, so in the homely presence of this generous lord of sublimity, saints and sages rise and shine in moral and spiritual grandeur. As rivers flow into the sea, as streams of rain flow into the lake, so do the beauties of faith and pleasure in soma yajnas concentrate on Indra, glory of the world. As showers of rain with profuse divine generosity raise the crops of barley and the plants grow up in ecstasy, so in the homely presence of this generous lord of sublimity, saints and sages rise and shine in moral and spiritual grandeur. 
5033 :Just as the swelling cloud causes the vapours of water in the skies to be released of itself and lets these showers of rain fall upon the earth, so does Indra, lord of glorious generosity, bring showers of light and bliss for the generous man of charity who offers the homage of soma to the lord for humanity. 8. Just as the swelling cloud causes the vapours of water in the skies to be released of itself and lets these showers of rain fall upon the earth, so does Indra, lord of glorious generosity, bring showers of light and bliss for the generous man of charity who offers the homage of soma to the lord for humanity. 
5034 :Let the thunderbolt of power and justice rise, let the voice of truth and law divine be generous, creative and fruitful as ever before, let the bright sun rise with its immaculate light and glory, may the lord protector and promoter of the good reveal the light and power of divinity as the bliss of heaven.9. Let the thunderbolt of power and justice arise, let the voice of truth and law divine be generous, creative and fruitful as ever before, let the bright sun rise with its immaculate light and glory, may the lord protector and promoter of the good reveal the light and power of divinity as the bliss of heaven. 
5035 :Let us dispel the darkness of ignorance with the communication of universal knowledge, let us remove the world’s hunger with food production, let us reclaim our original wealth of knowledge, power and prosperity with our innate lights and enlightened actions. Let us dispel the darkness of ignorance with the communication of universal knowledge, let us remove the world’s hunger with food production, let us reclaim our original wealth of knowledge, power and prosperity with our innate lights and enlightened actions. 
5036 :May Brhaspati, Lord of Infinity and the master of knowledge, protect us against the violence of sin and sinners upfront, behind, above or below. May Indra, ruler and friend of humanity, create and lead us to the wealth of life for us and our friends, all at present and in our midst. 11. May Brhaspati, lord of Infinity and the master of knowledge protect us against the violence of sin and sinners upfront, behind, above or below. May Indra, ruler and friend of humanity, create and lead us to the wealth of life for us and our friends, all at present and in our midst. 
5037 :Brhaspati, lord of this vast universe, and Indra, you are lords omnipotent of the glory and majesty of the world, you rule and order the light of heaven and the wealths of the earth. Pray bear and bring the light of divinity and wealth of the world to bless the celebrant and the worshipper. O lords and divinities of nature and humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and means of peace, prosperity and excellence all ways all time. 
5038 :Indra, we too have the same aims and objectives as you. We are your friends and admirers. We know and wish to achieve, and with all words of praise and appreciation, we adore you as others, wise devotees, do. 
5039 :Indra, lord of thunder and justice, in the beginning of a new plan, action or programme of holiness, I adore none else but you. I know only one song of adoration and that is for you alone. 
5040 :Divines of brilliance and holy action love those engaged in creative actions of piety. They care not for dreams and love no dreamers. Active, wakeful and realistic beyond illusion, they achieve the joy of success in life. 
5041 :Indra, generous and valorous lord ruler, giver of settlement, peace and progress, we are your admirers, and we stand for you. O lord, know this of us, for us and for the nation. 
5042 :O lord ruler of the nation, leave us not to the reviler, malignant scandaliser, and the selfish miser. My strength, intelligence and action sustains in you and flows from there. 
5043 :You are the celebrated armour of defence and all round protection, front rank warrior, destroyer of evil, darkness and want: committed to you in covenant, I say so and bind myself. 
5044 :Indra, lord of honour and valour, commander of the forces of life and freedom, we pledge to abide by you and exhort you for breaking of the clouds of rain, for the destruction of darkness and evil, for rousing courage and valour, and for challenging and beating back the enemy in battle. And we pray, inspire and exhort us too with full power and preparation. 
5045 :Indra, lord destroyer of evil and enemies, hero of a hundred acts of yajnic creation and development, may the sages of vision, imagination and effective communication refresh and update your mind and eye with foresight so that you face the challenges of the present time successfully. 
5046 :Indra, lord ruler excellent and honourable, hero of a hundred acts of imaginative vision, with all our best words, thoughts and resolutions, we pray and exhort you to realise your names and attributes in action so that under your leadership we may face the challenges of the time successfully against the arrogant and proud enemies. 
5047 :We exhort and exalt Indra, universally admired ruler of the world and sustainer of his people, by hundredfold celebrations of his names, attributes and brilliant exploits of heroism. 
5048 :I invoke Indra, invoked and worshipped by all, for the destruction of evil and victory in life’s battles for food, energy, prosperity and progress. 
5049 :Indra, be the challenger, warrior and winner of battles for prosperity and progress. O lord of a hundred creative actions, we invoke, exhort and exalt you for break up of the cloud into rain and elimination of the demon of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty. 
5050 :In the battles of forces in plans and programmes of development for prosperity and excellence, in the contests of forces positive and negative for good and evil, in the onslaughts of stormy troops of hostility in the efforts for growth in food, energy and enlightenment, in the struggles for self-realisation against pride and arrogance, Indra, O spirit of the soul, voice of conscience, genius of the nation, and invincible strength of character, tolerate, endure, challenge, fight and throw out the enemies of life’s light and joy. 
5051 :and humanity, leader of a hundred noble actions and master of knowledge, for our protection and progress, protect, defend, govern and promote the strongest and most prosperous, most brilliant and honourable, and the most wakeful and vigilant powers and people, and thus defend and safeguard the honour, happiness and excellence of the nation. 
5052 :Indra, ruler of the world, master of a hundred noble acts of governance, your powers and organs of perception operating among all the five classes of people, i.e., teachers and intellectuals, ruling powers and defence forces, producers and business men, ancillaries, and others, I accept and honour all these as powers and forces of yours. 
5053 :Indra, ruler and protector of the world, the assets of the dominion are high and rising. Hold and govern this formidable wealth, honour and excellence of the nation. And let us all, we pray, raise and exalt your courage and power, honour and glory. 
5054 :Indra, lord of might, ruler of the clouds, wielder of the thunderbolt and refulgent as the sun, come to us from far and from near, wherever you are. And whatever or wherever your abode, from there come to us here and now. 
5055 :Indra, light of life, dear as breath of vitality, mighty great, blazing as the sun which is stable in its orbit and enlightens and watches us all as it moves, may, we pray, remove all fear and give us freedom. 
5056 :May Indra, lord omnipotent, and the sun bless us with peace and comfort, and may sin and evil, we pray, never touch us either before or after, and may good alone be our share and fortune for all time. 
5057 :May Indra, lord omnipotent beyond all fear and violence, grant us freedom from all quarters of space. He watches all and he is the supreme victor over all enemies and contrarieties. 
5058 :In this great yajnic house of Vivasvan, lord of light, we raise our voice of celebrations in honour of Indra, lord of power and action, for the sake of honour and prosperity. Rarely is the jewel obtained by the lazy loons asleep. And slander finds no favour among the givers of wealth. 
5059 :Indra, lord of knowledge, wealth and power, you are the gateway to speed and fast advancement. You are the giver of divine speech and wealth of cows, earth and prosperity of life. You are the treasure house of food and energy. You are the lord giver of wealth and splendour. You are the leading light of education and scholarship. You are the refulgent lord of light. You are the chastiser of the lazy, an inspiration for the ambitious. And you are the friend of friends. Such is Indra whom we praise and celebrate in song. 
5060 :Indra, lord of power and glory, wisdom, Word, and action, versatile giver of success and victory, most brilliant and omniscient, the wealth all round is yours, you know. Therefore, O lord of victory, take that up and bear it along to bless us. Neglect not the desire and ambition of your celebrant, discount him not. 
5061 :Indra, lord of power and glory, pleased at heart, with these lights of knowledge and these streams of soma, preventing our want and poverty of wealth and knowledge, bless us with cows and horses, gifts of divine speech, lands and wealth of mind and wisdom, and speedy movement in progress, so that, subduing the evil and wicked enemies, and free from the jealous and hateful, we may enjoy and live happily with plenty of food and energy and joyous drinks of soma in a state of power and prosperity. 
5062 :Indra, lord of knowledge and power, honour and prosperity, let us begin well, advance, succeed and celebrate with noble wealth and power, food and energy, knowledge and speed, universal beauty and joy and the light of brilliance. Let us advance and enjoy with divine wisdom, forceful arms of the brave, prime lands and cows and sophisticated intelligence, and all this at the top speed of advancement. 
5063 :Lord of truth and protector of the people of truth and piety, when in the battles against Vrtra, demon of darkness and evil, for the defence of the hero of yajnic action you resolutely overthrow tens of thousands of the forces of darkness, then those joyous and generous fighters and lovers of soma celebrate the victories with you. 
5064 :With the courage and arms of a mighty warrior you go forward, engage the enemy and with your valour and splendour destroy the hostile fort yonder. With your friends and disciplined warriors, in the far off country, you uproot the guileful adversary who, otherwise, is a constant challenge and terror to humanity. 
5065 :By your ardour and brilliance you destroy the man who troubles the pious, who steals others’ money and property, and who waylays the travellers and prevents hospitality. By your own strength you rout a hundred strongholds of the purveyors of poison and exploitation and you protect the good creations and productions of people by disciplined expert masters of management. 
5066 :Indra, mighty sovereign, far and wide is your fame. Twenty are these rulers of the republics in need of help and they too are of noble fame come here for protection. Sixty thousand ninety-nine are their people. Save them from violence and loss of freedom with the strong chariot wheel of your sovereignty. 
5067 :Indra, lord of power and force of divinity, with your modes of protection and your modes of sustenance you cover and protect the man of noble fame and fast motion and, with your power of fulfilment and prosperity, you grant good health and full age, love of hospitality and the mighty thunderbolt of arms and justice to this great and youthful ruler commanding honour and brilliance. 
5068 :Indra, lord omnipotent of the world, dedicated as we are to the light of the Rks, we are protected by the divinities. All friends of yours, we pray, may we be at perfect peace in holy comfort and sing in praise of your glory. And by your grace, may we be blest with noble children and live a long, full and happy life. 
5069 :Lord of generous and creative power, when the yajna is on and soma is distilled, I prepare the cup and offer you the drink. Pray accept, drink to your heart’s content and enjoy the ecstasy of bliss divine. 
5070 :Let the fools and scoffers never get round you, even if they profess that they are keen to please you, for protection and support. Never support the negationists of knowledge, piety, existence and divinity. 
5071 :Here may the lovers of cows entertain you with milk and soma for the achievement of great competence and success so that you may drink like the thirsty stag drinking at the pool. 
5072 :To the best of your knowledge and culture and with the best of your language, worship and adore Indra, protector of stars and planets, lands and cows, language and culture, creator of the dynamics of existence and protector of its constancy. 
5073 :Let the vibrations of divinity, like crimson rays of dawn which bring the sun to the earth, bring Indra on to our sacred grass where we humans meet and pray and celebrate the lord in song together. 
5074 :Lands and cows, suns and planets, indeed all objects in motion, exude for Indra, wielder of thunder, the ichor of emotional adoration seasoned with ecstasy like honey sweet milk mixed with soma which he receives close at hand and cherishes. 
5075 :Come lord of clouds and mountains, Indra, illustrious as the sun, invoked and invited, come straight to us, wholly without reserve, come for a drink of soma by horses fast as wings of the winds. 
5076 :The yajaka is seated for our yajna according to the season, the seats are fixed and spread in order, the stones have been used for the morning libations. 
5077 :These hymns are sung in honour of Divinity. O Spirit Divine, come and grace the sacred grass. O lord of power and majesty, come and enjoy the delicious offering. 
5078 :Indra, lord of honour and excellence, destroyer of darkness and evil, breaker of clouds and harbinger of showers, celebrated in song, abide and rejoice in these celebrations of the season’s prosperity in our yajnas, in these hymns of divinity and in these holy chants of mantras. 
5079 :Intelligent people love Indra, great and broad minded, lover of soma and protector of honour and prosperity, and commander of strength and power, just the same way as cows love their calf. 
5080 :Indra, lord lover of soma and commander of power, rejoice at heart with your whole personality for the realisation of food, energy and wealth of life. Let not your devotee and celebrant face an occasion of embarrassment, blame, insult or contempt. 
5081 :Indra, lord of love and power, we, your devotees and admirers, bearing gifts of homage, sing and celebrate your honour. And you love us too, our very shelter and home. 
5082 :Indra, lord lover of speed and progress, forsake us not, leave us not, go not far away, come hither close to us. Lord self-sufficient and self-refulgent, be here with us. Rejoice. 
5083 :May two carriers with flames of fire, fed on clarified and bright burning fuel, carry you forward, up and down, in a comfortable car and reach you to the heights of the sky. 
5084 :Indra, lord of power and honour, come hither to our soma yajna and taste our soma seasoned with cow’s milk. Come by your chariot drawn by horses, self- programmed to reach us. 
5085 :Indra, lord of power, honour and prosperity, come taste this pleasure of soma floating in the skies and distilled by the clouds. Great are the virtues of this soma, highly soothing, satisfying and inspiring. 
5086 :Let my words of adoration thus inspired rise up from here and reach across the sky beyond the clouds to share the ecstasy of soma with Indra. 
5087 :We invoke and invite Indra, lord of energy and knowledge, here, with songs of adoration and words of sacred speech, to have a drink of soma, and we pray he may come again and again. 
5088 :Indra, father of morning freshness, lord of a hundred acts of yajna, distilled are these soma essences. Take these, hold them safe in the treasury of this world for a fresh lease of life’s energy. 
5089 :We know you for sure, O lord of knowledge and vision, winner of wealth and bold fighter of battles for health and energy. And now we pray to you for the gift of peace and comfort of well-being. 
5090 :and have a drink of this soma of ours filtered with the shower of clouds, reinforced with rays of the sun and accompanied by a diet of barley milk. 
5091 :Indra, lord lover of power and energy, for your drink I distil and reinforce this soma in my own yajnic house of science. It would inspire, strengthen and delight your heart. 
5092 :Indra, veteran lord and ruler of the world, we children of knowledge and humility invoke and invite you to have a drink of the soma of our own making for the sake of protection and progress. 
5093 :O Indra, lord ruler and protector, in a horse- powered chariot the pioneer goes forward first over lands and oceans in the world, man of zeal and courage as he is, protected by all your means of safety and defence. And him you bless with abundant wealth and fame which come to him as prominent rivers from all round join and flow into the sea. 
5094 :Just as holy waters go to the sea and the vapours concentrate in the cloud, so do holy people go to yajna and to Indra, lord of yajna, and as they see the yajna spread around from the vedi as shelter of life’s protection, so they conduct themselves in the tradition of ancient scholars and go forward to the holiest of the holies of existence and, like the best people of knowledge, action and devotion, love the divine lord and the divine lore as the highest boon of life. 
5095 :offerings held in the ladles raised by the wedded couple, so graciously listen and accept the holy prayers of the two, ancients and moderns, teacher and disciple, husband and wife, parent and child, for the good of both. Even the loose and the wanton, under your care, find shelter and protection and grow. The gracious power of yajna creates and offers everything for the yajamana. 
5096 :And then the scientists of fire and energy, leaders of mankind who light the fires and who first offer the libations into the fire with holy acts of love and peace, win their share of praise and fame with the reward of horses, speed and motion, wealth of cows, sensitivity of mind and senses and the joy of life and celestial vision. 
5097 :As Atharva, scholar of sustained constancy like energy in stasis, discovers and creates the prime path of motion by yajnic research, the noble solar scientist brilliant as the sun dedicated to his vow rises in knowledge and discovers the path of the earth. Then the poetic sage prophetically inspired sings of the beauty of Venus and satellites bom of the sun. And we meditate and pray for immortality of the state of moksha. 
5098 :Where knowledge and science is collected like holy grass of yajna for the sake of noble posterity, where holy verses illuminating as the sun in heaven are chanted, where the artist carves around the vedi and holy mantras resound as thunder of the clouds, there in the blessed foods and offerings, Indra, lord of yajna, rejoices and speaks. 
5099 :O lord of showers and nature’s radiant rays, I move this prayer and offer this soma drink distilled so true and exalting for your pleasure. Indra, adored and exalted by all our songs, thoughts and holy actions here, pray rejoice and exalt us too. 
5100 :Friends together and friends of Indra ever stronger and mightier, in every act of production and progress and in every battle for protection and preservation, we call upon Indra for defence and victory for well-being. 
5101 :If Indra hears our call, let Him come, we pray, with a thousand ways of protection and progress of prosperity and well-being. 
5102 :I invoke and call upon the Primeval Man, eternal father, who creates this multitudinous existence from the eternal womb of nature, the same whom our original forefathers invoked and worshipped. 
5103 :Pious souls in meditation commune with the great and gracious lord of existence immanent in the steady universe and transcendent beyond. Brilliant are they with the lord of light and they shine in the heaven of bliss. 
5104 :Scholars of science dedicated to Indra study and meditate on the lord’s omnipotence of light, fire and wind, and harness the energy like two horses to a chariot, both beautiful, equal and complementary as positivenegative currents, fiery red, powerful and carriers of people. 
5105 :Children of the earth, know That who creates light and knowledge for the ignorant in darkness and gives form and beauty to the formless and chaotic, and regenerate yourselves by virtue of the men of knowledge and passion for action. 
5106 :Indra, lord of universal knowledge, power and prosperity, if I were, like you, the sole master of wealth, wisdom and power in my field, then pray may my dependent and celebrant also be blest with wealth and wisdom of the world. (Let all of us together be blest with abundance of wealth and wisdom under the social dispensation of our system of government and administration.) O lord and master of world power and prosperity, Indra, if I were master of knowledge and controller of power, I would love to share and give wealth and knowledge to this noble minded person of vision and wisdom. 
5107 :Indra, the divine voice of your omniscience, omnipotence and bliss overflows with universal truth and rectitude of the law of existence and showers the abundance of prosperity and advancement upon the dedicated yajamana who distils and creates the soma of joy for the world. 
5108 :Indra, when you are pleased to bless the celebrant with power, prosperity and excellence, then neither mortal nor immortal can restrain the abundant flow of your grace and generosity. 
5109 :Yajna, joint creative endeavour which protects and replenishes the earth and environment, pleases and elevates Indra, the ruler, and creates a place of bliss in the light of heaven for the doer. 
5110 :the lord whose glory rises with the expansive universe and who rule over the entire wealth and power of the worlds of existence. 
5111 :When Indra, lord omnipotent and blissful, eliminates all obstructions and negativities from our paths of progress, then we see the entire space in existence shines with light and overflows with the joy of soma bliss. 
5112 :When the lord shakes up our psychic energies to the depths and throws out our darkness and negativities, then he sharpens our senses along with pranic energies and opens out our spiritual potential hidden in the cave of the heart. 
5113 :The bright and beautiful, blessed and blissful stars and planets of refulgent space, expansive, firm and constant by virtue of the omnipotence of Indra, no one can shake or dislodge from their position of stability. 
5114 :Like exulting waves of the sea, this hymn of adoration rises and reaches you, and the vibrations of your joyous response too emanate and pervade everywhere. 
5115 :By you the songs of praise and adoration thrive and exalt, by you the songs of celebration and prayer vibrate and fructify. Indeed, you do all the good to the celebrants. 
5116 :herbs and trees with branches, leaves and filaments carry the spirit of divinity and nature’s energy to the creative centres of life’s bounty. 
5117 :When you fight out the adversaries of life and humanity, you crush the head of the demon of drought and famine with the sea mist and the cloud. 
5118 :With your mysterious powers and tactics, you destroy the crafty thieves and saboteurs roaming around even if they have risen to the heights of clouds. 
5119 :Indra, protector of the creative joy and prosperity of life and humanity in a state of peace, you being the better and higher of all others, you frustrate, dismiss and dissolve the factious assembly which has failed to be creative and cooperative as a corporate body. 
5120 :Hari (Indra) Devata, Baru or Sarvahari Rshi g ff viPHN ift g d cf% ^hni 1 i^tt g^gi O lord omnipotent, Hari, in your great cosmic yajna, I adore your forces of Rtam and Satyam. Lord of beauty, glory and bliss, I pray for the joy of your ecstatic bliss, which, beautiful and beatific with showers of joy, blesses life on earth as ghrta exalts the sacred fire. May our words of adoration and prayer reach your blissful presence immanent in the universe. 
5121 :You, in concert, adore and exalt Hari, omnipotent original cause of the universe as he pervades the divine spatial home, whom hymns of Veda and rays of the sun please and fulfil with their vibrations and radiations as cows fulfil the yajna with ghrta and milk, whose powers of Rtam and Satyam with their centrifugal and centripetal forces you praise: Please study and honour that power of his which bears the burden of the world of nature and humanity. Do so for the sake of the honour and excellence of life on the way forward. 
5122 :That power of Hari, omnipotent Indra, is the thunderbolt, and the thunderbolt is electric, magnetic, unfailing in aim and desire and it is borne in the hands of centrifugal and centripetal forces. It is bright and blazing, mighty passionate, punitive and destructive for the evil. Indeed in Indra as in the sun, all forms, all colours and all beauties are integrated. 
5123 :The power of Indra, the Bajra, is held as the sun blazing in heaven. It expands and pervades like the bright rays radiating all over space. Destroying evil, breaking the clouds of darkness, glorious and mighty, the adamantine Bajra of a thousand flames shines as the symbol of the power of omnipotence. 
5124 :Indra, lord of light and knowledge, self- manifested universal spirit of light, love and beauty, loved and adored by the earliest celebrant sages, you alone received, acknowledged and blest the adorations of the past, and you alone are the sole, unique, beloved, universally adorable giver of success and fulfillment, you who love, receive, acknowledge and bless the gifts of adoration and yajna offered to you. 
5125 :Those adorable carriers, centrifugal and centripetal forces of divine nature, bear and sustain the power and presence of the thunder armed, joyous, adorable Indra in the divine blissful chariot, the universe of existence. For this Indra, blissful lord, many yajna sessions, soma oblations and beautiful gifts of homage are prepared and offered. 
5126 :The dynamics of divine nature sustain the refulgent Indra for its holy solar purpose. The same powers energise the gravitational forces to hold the sun in balanced orbit. By these energy forces does Indra’s presence vibrate in the universe with love. And through these very forces does Indra fulfil his dear divine purpose. 
5127 :The world’s greenery is his hair, golden rays of light, his locks. Wielding thunder and gravitation, his radiation enters waters of the earth and vapours of space. He expands in power and presence, and with powers of instant radiation, he shines as lord of abundant earth and overcomes all evils of disease and darkness with his catalytic forces. 
5128 :His golden eyes, sun and moon, move and radiate light as two ladles of ghrta feed and exalt the fire, and the heaven and earth like his golden jaws move for the food, energy and advancement of life. In his created world, having tasted of the delicious and inspiring food and drink, man refines and exalts his will and understanding. 
5129 :Potent and charming Indra pervades the regions of heaven and earth as his home and with his power and presence roars like a hero going to war. With his might he wields both the great earth and the refulgent heaven, loves them and bears abundant food, strength and joy for life there. 
5130 :you beautify and beatify the heaven and earth with new and newer favours, you love and create fresh and rising thoughts of admiration and adoration. O lord of vital energy and inspiration, pray open the homely state of earth and humanity to the illumination of the sun and light divine. 
5131 :Indra, may the radiations of your light bear and bring you, glorious lord of golden visor, by your cosmic chariot to the people so that you, loving the yajna, drink of the honey sweet soma extracted and prepared with utmost dexterity of hand and care in the hall of yajna. 
5132 :Indra, lord of light divine and solar radiations, you have drunk of the soma of the ancients of earliest sessions. This yajna session and the soma extracted in here is only for you. O lord of generous showers in this session, pray, drink of the honey sweet soma of our love and faith and let the showers of bliss flow and fill the skies and space unto the depth of our heart. 
5133 :Indra, lord omnipotent, Hariva, saviour from suffering and commander of nature’s forces, drink of the ecstatic soma created and seasoned in the joyous currents of our karma at heart in the soul by enlightened sages. Pray accept, protect and promote this soma of joy showered by clouds and seasoned by sages for you, and feel exalted with them all to your full satisfaction and ever increase the joy. 
5134 :O lord of showers and nature’s radiant rays, I move this prayer and offer this soma drink distilled so true and exalting for your pleasure. Indra, adored and exalted by all our songs, thoughts and holy actions here, pray rejoice and exalt us too. 
5135 :Indra, lord of holy actions of creation, sustenance and finale, under your protection by your power and generosity, ardent devotees bearing food, good health and long age, knowing and pursuing the laws of truth and yajnic living, blest with good progeny and noble humanity, abide in their yajnic home, singing, rejoicing and celebrating your generosity. 
5136 :Ye men and women of the world, Indra is the generous self-refulgent lord omnipotent and omniscient who, first manifested, creates and adorns the generous earth and brilliant stars. It is by the grandeur of his mighty wealth and power of action that the heaven and earth and the middle regions of the skies move around in orbit. 
5137 :O people of the world, it is Indra, lord omnipotent, who establishes the moving earth in balance in orbit and silences the angry volcanoes and roaring clouds, who encompasses the vast skies and holds up the high heavens of light.(Such is Indra, universal energy.) People of the world, it is Indra who breaks the cloud into showers and makes the seven rivers and seven seas flow, who makes the moving stars and planets such as earth and satellites such as moon dance around in order, who wields and controls the entire energy of the universe, who creates the fire at the centre of the stone and the cloud and controls the making and breaking of the elements in the cosmic dynamics. 
5138 :moving world of existence, who conceives and fixes the emergent form deep in the cavern of the mind, who takes on the target like an unfailing hunter, all those in course of time which are created and nurtured by him: Such is Indra, O people of the world. 
5139 :Of whom they often ask: Where is he? He is terrible, say they. He is everywhere, say some. He is nowhere, say others. He is the master and lord of all, and like a terror he shoots down the thriving ones: Such, O people, is Indra. Know him well in truth, and have faith. 
5140 :He is inspirer of the obedient worshipper, support of the weak and emaciated, promoter of knowledge and Veda, saviour of the poor and destitute, and strength of the celebrant; he is protector of the person who is dedicated to learning and soma-yajna, commands knowledge and creates the joy of soma in His are the waves of energy pervading in the directions and sub-directions of space. His are the horses and the cows, his the earths and the rays of light. His are the villages and all the chariots of the world. He creates the sun and the dawn, revealing them every day anew. He is the mover and guide of the waters and spatial energy. Such, O people, is Indra, universal energy. 
5141 :Whom the heaven and earth wheeling, whirling, humming the celestial music of the spheres together and vying each other in homage, invoke, whom the highest and farthest as well as lowest and nearest, all, friends and non-friends, worship alike as riding the same chariot, invoke and worship in various ways: that, O people of the world, is Indra, lord of power over all. 
5142 :Without whom the people win no victories, on whom the warriors depend for protection, who is the comprehending measure of the universe and the unmoved mover of the cosmic dynamics: he, O people of the world, is Indra. 
5143 :He who holds and governs the eternal constituents of existence, who with his power of justice and punishment destroys the disreputables taking recourse to great sins and crimes, who disapproves, scotches and silences the evil tongue of the maligner, and who eliminates the wicked exploiter: such, O people, is Indra. 
5144 :the cloud on the fortieth day of autumn (or in the fortieth autumn) and breaks the cloud, heavy with water for showers yet sleeping like a giant, thus releasing the rain- showers: such, O people, is Indra, the mighty Sun. 
5145 :O people, know that omnipotent Indra who, with terrible strikes of thunder, breaks the dark giant cloud and releases. He also blesses the yajamana and the people at large in whose innermost heart of peace and love he pervades. Such is Indra, gracious and mighty. 
5146 :Who shines bright with seven-colour rays of light, mightily generous, immensely full of energy and power, and, breaking the clouds to rain showers, releases the seven floods of water, rivers and seas rolling and flowing, and who energises the moon and the cloud ascending towards the sun under the Rohini asterism, that, dear people, is Indra, the Sun, mighty with his arms of thunder and adamant. 
5147 :Heaven and earth bow to him in homage. Clouds cower and mountains quake for fear of his power. He is the creator, preserver and promoter of the soma nectar and ecstasy of life, knowledge concentrate and power both, thunder-armed for punishment and protection, flower-handed with kusha grass for blessing and benediction. Such is Indra, lord of light and might and life of life, O children of the earth. 
5148 :He who protects the creative man of yajnic action, who promotes the man struggling for perfection, and who, with all his modes of protection and progress, advances the prayerful celebrant pilgrim on way to Dharma, piety and charity, He is Indra, know ye all children of the earth. The Veda glorifies him, the soma- joy of the world celebrates him, the beauty and perfection of this creation proclaims his art and presence. 
5149 :He that shines in the innocence of the new born baby and proclaims his presence in the partner’s lap, who knows no other creator of the world of existence than himself, and who, adored and celebrated by us, fulfils our obligations of piety to the divinities through ourselves, that is Indra. 
5150 :He that loves the soma of love and peace, whom the sun rays radiate, who is great and wise, by whom all worlds of existence shine, blaze, and yet shake with awe, who breaks giant clouds of darkness and shatters mighty mountains, who is all potent and the sole one unique hero without a parallel, that is Indra. 
5151 :Indra, lord of light and life, potent and inviolable, you provide all power and protection with speed of advancement for the creative and struggling perfectionist, and you ward off all force of opposition from him. Lord of existence, surely you are the ultimate Truth, you are Eternal. Lord giver of life and potency, we love you, we are your dear darlings. We pray that confident and brave, blest with noble progeny, we may always honour you with holy songs of celebration and creative action in yajna. 
5152 :In honour of this lord Indra, mighty power, great leader, holy celebrity and commander of the brave, informidable to the enemies, I offer an excellent song of praise in adoration and holiest offerings of the most spontaneous and liberal homage. 
5153 :You offer to this Indra, lord of life and power, libations of homage and reverence like gifts of dainty food. So do I bear and offer to him songs of praise well- structured and formulaic modes of defence and protection against the enemies of humanity. Come ye all, cleanse your mind honestly by heart, mind and soul for Indra, ancient and eternal lord of life and light, and serve him. 
5154 :For the sake of the advancement of Agni, the ruler, and of the people of knowledge and wisdom, I speak noble and powerfully persuasive words in support of this exemplary, generous, revered and magnanimous hero, a great man of wisdom and piety of conduct. 
5155 :For this Indra, ruling lord of knowledge and power, master promoter of divine speech and veteran of wisdom, I create and float a song of praise of universal and persuasive purport and use words of discriminating wisdom to strengthen his power and control over the land and people just as an engineer creates a strong structure for the chassis of the master’s chariot. 
5156 :As a driver yokes the horse to the master’s chariot to drive him on, so, in honour of Indra and in order to celebrate and exalt him, brave hero as he is, treasure home of charity and destroyer of enemy strongholds, whose fame rings far and wide, I compose a song in my own words and offer it as a libation to him with my own ladle in homage. 
5157 :Let Tvashta, the Maker, design and form for this Indra, ruling Lord of power and defence, the thunderbolt of lightning force blazing for the battle so that he (Indra), striking with this fatal weapon, taking many enemies on, may reach the mortal centrespot of Vrtra, the cloud of darkness and ignorance (and release the showers of rain and prosperity and the light of knowledge). 
5158 :In the yajnic programmes of this Indra, lord of rule and power, who measures everything to size, Vishnu, the great sun pervading everything with its light, drinks up the delicious holy foods prepared and sent up sanctified from the yajna, and then, challenging the mountainous cloud hoarding up the wealth of the same yajnic foods in the form of vapours, breaks up the cloud and throws it down (releasing the showers of rain). 
5159 :For this Indra, blazing as the sun with light and grandeur, holy voices served and preserved by noble sages and scholars composed hymns of praise and offered homage to Indra on the breakup of the cloud. Indra holds both the vast heaven and earth, but these two do not comprehend his grandeur and greatness (which exceeds heaven and earth both). 
5160 :Surely the greatness and grandeur of this Indra exceeds the heaven, skies and earth. The self-refulgent hero, universal warrior, brilliant and brave, infinitely strong and bold, resounds in the universe for battle against evil and negation. 
5161 :O lord of power and law, with the strength and rectitude of this Indra, the universal force of Divinity uproots the exploitative forces, just as the sun breaks down the cloud which holds up the rain and scorches the earth. And just as held up cows are released from the stalls, so the ruler releases the streams of life on the earth, enlightened hero as he is, who releases food and justice for the powers of generosity. 
5162 :By the might and splendour of this Indra, the rivers flow and seas roll at will since he gives the blow (to Vrtra and releases the waters below). Ruler, controller, and giver of power and honour, instantly victorious, giving liberally to the generous, he creates firm standing ground for the speedy success of generosity all round. 
5163 :Indra, ruling lord of manifold power, fast and impetuous, wields the thunderbolt of sunrays for this Vrtra, cloud of vapours and darkness, and releasing the waters for the streams to flow on earth, breaks the layers of vapours with the thunderbolt as lightning breaks things into pieces bit by bit. 
5164 :Sing and celebrate the old and new exploits of this fast and powerful Indra in songs of praise, Indra who, passionate and tempestuous, updating and wielding the weapons for battle, strikes and destroys the enemies. 
5165 :By the power and holy fear of this omnipotent Indra, the mountains stay firm and fixed, and the heaven and earth and the people shake with awe. The leader, abiding in the protective shade of this intelligent and handsome power and chanting words of praise, immediately rises and grows capable of great action. 
5166 :Indra, sole one lord of himself, is the absolute ruler of many. Whatever he wills of these and commands, the same is rendered in reverence and obedience. And Indra himself advances and protects the hero of power and honour who, fighting for victory in the battle of horse, spurs on his steed in the direction of the sun. 
5167 :Indra, O Lord of sunbeams, these are the songs divine, purest and serene, offered by the highest souls of faith and vision. Bless these souls with universal brilliance of vision and intelligence, lord omniscient. Lord Omnificent, reveal your presence in our mind instantly with the light of the dawn. 
5168 :The one sole lord of humanity worthy of yajnic homage is Indra, whom I adore with these words of praise. He it is, lord generous, giver of showers of strength and bliss, eternal, imperishable, omnificent, omnipotent and forbearing, who protects and sustains life as supreme father and guardian. 
5169 :Him our ancient forefathers and the seven sages, like our five senses, mind and intellect, alongwith their fellow men, have celebrated and glorified, the lord that is the tamer and controller of opposition, saviour from suffering, pervasive in clouds and over mountains, sweet of tongue and strongest in force and power. 
5170 :We pray to Indra for his gifts of wealth, happy progeny, man power and generous abundance which he, lord of unlimited potential, ageless and blissful, commanding men and transport, would, we hope, bring us for his joy and ours. 
5171 :Indra, speak to us how the ancient celebrants of yours were blest with the gift of peace and joy. Say what is your share and contribution therein, what joy and ecstasy of being, O lord irresistible, forceful, universally invoked, commanding immense riches, destroyer of evil and the wicked. 
5172 :If the voice and words of a person are vibrant with devotion and eloquent with enquiry in right earnest about Indra, lord of power, honour and excellence, wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, riding the chariot of life, strong with iron grasp, bold in action, giver of tempestuous strength and commander of cosmic force, then such a person wins the lord’s favour of dominion over land for food, energy and the happiness of his heart’s desire. 
5173 :O lord of your own essential strength and splendour, divine and exuberant, with this thunder force of yours fast as mind, imperishable and indomitable, pray shatter that stronghold of evil, growing by illusion firmly fixed and even reinforced by deceptive reason. 
5174 :May Indra, lord of infinite knowledge and power, bless us and you all with the best and latest vision and intelligence in order that we may adore and glorify the omnipotent eternal lord as ever, and may the lord saviour of the celestial chariot bring us universal strength of action, otherwise unattainable, and take us across all impassable impediments. 
5175 :O lord of generous showers of light and purity of peace, light up and reveal the blazing magnificence of the regions of earth, firmament and heaven for people stricken with hate, jealousy and enmity against life, humanity, divinity and revelation of the glory of existence. Let them feel the heat and light of the blaze from all sides, heat up even the green earth and cool waters for them, and thus let them be cleansed through suffering and penitence. 
5176 :Indra, self-refulgent ruler of earth and the world of light, of humanity and the moving world, ageless lord of light and justice, take the thunderbolt of light and justice in the right hand, destroy the wiles of the wicked and give the light of knowledge to the seekers. 
5177 :Indra, lord of adamantine will and power, ruler of the world, bring in that wide ranging and inviolable peace and well being in a state of constant vigilance and dynamism to win over enmity and opposition, by which darkness and ignorance can be replaced by light and knowledge and the lower and average orders of society can be raised to higher state of enlightenment and action. 
5178 :O lord all wise and worshipful, universally adored and invited, come to us by well controlled and well directed modes and means of advancement with those laws and policies of universal interest and value and application, which neither the impious obstruct nor the pious camouflage. Come straight here to us with these without delay. 
5179 :Indra, lord commander of weapons sharp and blazing as rays of light, virile, generous and yet fearsome as a bull, is the one supreme who guides, controls, rules and inspires the world community, and he is the one who always is the supporting power of the house and children of the indigent who cannot afford to pay for education and development. O lord, you are the guide and giver of wealth and knowledge to the man dedicated to the yajnic development of humanity. 
5180 :Indra, brilliant ruler, you govern and strike your thunderbolt of justice and punishment, listen to the voice of the people in the battle business of life and protect the sagely man of judgement and discretion with your force when you fight the demon of drought, punish the selfish exploiter and food polluter and help and arrange for the education of the children of noble mothers all O bold and determined ruler, with all your power and determination, and with all your methods and tactics of defence and offence, protect and preserve the assets of the nation acquired, support the commander of services, guard the wielders of high class weapons and protect their families, defend the powers of law and order against crime, and in the battle against want and darkness and for victory in the battle field of defence and development, protect the supply line and citizens of the land. 
5181 :O leader and commander equipped with transport, communications and armoured fighting forces, cherished and honoured ruler of the heart of the nation, in the battle business of the protection and advancement of the divinities of nature and humanity, you fight out and eliminate the cumulated forces of darkness and destruction with the assistance and cooperation of the leading people. You lay to sleep and totally destroy the violent criminal, the thief and the terrorist in order to suppress and root out the forces of negation and destruction. 
5182 :O wielder of the thunderbolt, those frightful forces of yours which instantly destroy nintynine citadels of want and darkness and hundreds more for the entry of light and justice, pray demolish the unbreakable walls of the forts of impenetrable ignorance, superstition, prejudice, hatred and violence. 
5183 :Indra, lord of light and power, those permanent gifts and protections of the world of existence you have created and granted for the oblation bearing yajaka, for the generous man of charity, and for the commander of the protective forces of humanity, and those mighty motive forces of life’s power and generosity which I harness in your service may, O lord of all ruling power, we pray, bring us all voices of Divinity, all means and modes of sustenance, and all success and progress in our life. 
5184 :O lord of peace, patience and justice, ruler of dynamic powers and people, in this social order of your governance, let us not be exposed to a state of throw away sin and crime. Save us by virtue of the company of non-violent, best and wisest protective people. Let us abide among your dearest favourites and loved ones, among the brave, the wise and the virtuous. 
5185 :Lord of wealth, honour and excellence, let us all, leaders and friends of yours, abide and rejoice as your dearest in the protective shelter of your love and good will for our desired aims. Inspire and refine the nearest settled neighbour as well as the traveller on the move, raising the generous host in honour and praise for hospitality. 
5186 :O lord of light, honour and excellence of generosity, select us for dedication to that holy work which, under the protection of your love and goodwill, leading scholars and interpreters of the Divine Word relentlessly pursue, reciting and teaching the Vedic songs of divinity and, by recitation and exhortation, converting even hard headed businessmen to generous givers of charity in the service of Divinity. 
5187 :These songs of adoration offered to you, O highest leader of the leaders of men, in fact, come back to us, giving wealth, honours and excellence of life. O lord, in these people’s battle against darkness, want and injustice, be their friend, wise protector and kind defender. 
5188 :Indra, wise and brave leader and ruler of the world celebrated in song, exhorting the brave, commanding the defence and protection and the wealth of power, prosperity, food, energy and divine wisdom, grow in body, mind and soul by your body politic, and help us grow as a united commonwealth blest with honour, excellence and prosperity, and let there be no alliances of opposition and enmity against humanity. O lord and leaders of the world, protect and promote us in a state of honourable peace, prosperity and all round well being for all time. 
5189 :Indra, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, we hold the yajna and distil the soma of life in your service. Come, grace this holy seat of my yajna dedicated to you, watch my performance, enjoy the soma, and protect and promote the yajna for the beauty and joy of life. 
5190 :Let the radiant waves of cosmic energy engaged in the service of divinity bring you here. Pray listen to our songs of prayer and adoration. 
5191 :Dedicated to divinity and the divine voice, meditating on the divine presence with concentrated mind and soul, living in truth the beauty of life and expressing the ecstasy of soma, we invoke and wait for Indra, original maker and lover of soma, to come and bless us. 
5192 :The singers of Vedic hymns worship Indra, infinite lord of the expansive universe, Indra, the Sun, lord of light, Indra, Vayu, Maruts, currents of energy, and Indra, the universal Divine voice, with prayers, mantras, actions and scientific research. 
5193 :Indra, the omnipresent Spirit, Indra, the universal energy of vayu or maruts, and Indra, the solar energy, the bond of unity and sustenance in things, coexistent synthesis of equal and opposite complementarities of positive and negative, activiser of speech, lord of the thunderbolt and the golden light of the day and the year. 
5194 :Indra, lord omnipotent, raised the sun high up in the heavens for expansive light and vision. With the rays of the sun, He forms and moves the cloud for rain. 
5195 :For the sake of you all of humanity, we invoke and worship Indra, the one lord ruler over the universe, and we pray He may be with us in vision in a state of absolute bliss. 
5196 :When Indra, lord omnipotent and blissful, eliminates all obstructions and negativities from our paths of progress, then we see the entire space in existence shines with light and overflows with the joy of soma bliss. 
5197 :When the lord shakes up our psychic energies to the depths and throws out our darkness and negativities, then he sharpens our senses along with pranic energies and opens out our spiritual potential hidden in the cave of the heart. 
5198 :The bright and beautiful, blessed and blissful stars and planets of refulgent space, expansive, firm and constant by virtue of the omnipotence of Indra, no one can shake or dislodge from their position of stability. 
5199 :Like exulting waves of the sea, this hymn of adoration rises and reaches you, and the vibrations of your joyous response too emanate and pervade everywhere. 
5200 :Marut, wind energy, is seen while moving alongwith the indomitable sun, both beautiful and joyous, divinities coexistent, equal in splendour by virtue of omnipresent Indra, Lord Supreme. 
5201 :The yajnic dynamics of nature’s currents of energy, Maruts, so potent and effective, illuminates the world and does homage to the Lord of creation with the immaculate blazing radiations of glorious sun light. 
5202 :Bearing the sacred vapours of yajna as is their wont and nature, the winds rise to the sky, hold the clouds in their womb, and after the rain carry on the cycle with the sun-rays and yajna-fire. 
5203 :Indra, lord of light and space, unchallenged and unchallengeable, wields the thunderbolt and, with weapons of winds, light and thunder, breaks the clouds of ninty-nine orders of water and electricity for the sake of humanity and the earth. 
5204 :Just as the sun reaches and breaks the densest concentrations of vapours in the clouds fast moving in the regions of the sky, so should the ruler know the best part of his fastest forces stationed on the mountains and of the enemy forces lurking around and in the forests if he desires victory. 
5205 :Just as here on the surface of the earth and in its environment, we know, there is the beautiful light of the sun penetrating and reaching everywhere, similarly, let all know, it is there on the surface of the moon. (Just as the sun holds and illuminates the earth and the moon, so should the ruler with his light of justice and power hold and brighten every home in the land.) Indra, lord of the universe, rising with your might and majesty, protect and energise both heaven and earth and promote the soma of life’s vitality created in both heaven and earth by nature and humanity by yajna. 
5206 :Indra, when you stimulate and energise the soma vitality of life created by nature and humanity, and when you rise as the destroyer of the negativities of the counterforce, then both heaven and earth vibrate and celebrate your majesty in awe with admiration. 
5207 :I study, measure, develop and pray for language revealed in eight works, i.e., four Vedas and four Upavedas, spoken across four classes of humanity and through four stages of the individual’s development from birth to death, developing over nine blooming branches like flower garlands across nine regions of the earth, ultimately touching the truth of divine reality, the Word Imperishable descended from and ascending to Indra, lord of omniscience across the countless branches of dialects and structures. 
5208 :Break off all the jealous adversaries, remove all obstacles, eliminate the enemies and violence and fill the world with cherished wealth, honour and prosperity. 
5209 :Whatever wanted wealth hidden in solid mountains, concealed in secret and trust worthy sources or covered in caverns and deep in the clouds, bring that That immense wealth discovered by you and collected, of which the people of the world know, bring that cherished treasure into the open and fill the world with it for all. 
5210 :With songs of celebration glorify Indra, refulgent ruler of humanity, worthy of adoration, leader, destroyer of evil people, the greatest and most munificent. 
5211 :Unto him all songs of adoration return, to him all honours and fame of the world reach, in him they rejoice like streams and rivers reaching and rejoicing in the sea. 
5212 :Him with songs of adoration I glorify as the first and highest ruler, constantly active in cosmic dynamics, and the greatest warrior and winner for the celebrant’s good. 
5213 :Indra, light and power of existence, this creation is yours for sure. Just as a pigeon flies into the nest to meet its mate, so do you pervade and impregnate nature to create the world of forms, and listen to our words of praise and prayer. 
5214 :Indra, celebrated in the divine voice of revelation, creator and guardian of the world and its wealth, mighty lord of omnipotence, great and true is your glory, and may our praise and prayer to you be Indra, hero of a hundred great acts of yajnic creation, rise and stay high for our defence and protection in this battle of life. And we would sing your praises in prayer with joy in other battles too together with you. 
5215 :All people, communities and nations adore and exalt Indra who brings wealth, peace and prosperity to humanity, creates light and hope for their battles of life, and challenges and destroys enemies by fighting them out. 
5216 :He, Indra, lord of deliverance and giver of fulfilment, invoked and adored by all, pilots us across the seas of life by the boat of divine guidance and saves us against all jealousies, enmities and negativities of the world. 
5217 :Indra, lord of power and giver of fulfilment, by gifts of science and energy and with noble acts and persistent endeavour, pray lead us well by noble paths to peace, prosperity and well being. 
5218 :That Indra, dynamic and enlightened mind and intelligence, we cultivate and strengthen for the elimination of the great waste, deep ignorance and suffering prevailing in the world. May that light and mind be exuberant and generous for us with showers of enlightenment. 
5219 :Indra, mind and intelligence, was created for enlightenment and for giving enlightenment. Most lustrous and powerful, it is engaged in the creation of joy. It is rich in the wealth of knowledge, praise-worthy, and cool, gentle and at peace in the state of enlightenment. 
5220 :Held in and by the voice of divinity like the roar of thunder and like the flood of sun-rays, it is powerful, unfallen, irrepressible and lofty with thought, so let it express itself freely. 
5221 :The singers of Vedic hymns worship Indra, infinite lord of the expansive universe, Indra, the sun, lord of light, Indra, vayu, maruts, currents of energy, and Indra, the universal divine voice, with prayers, mantras, actions and scientific research. 
5222 :Indra, the omnipresent Spirit, Indra, the universal energy of vayu or maruts, and Indra, the solar energy, the bond of unity and sustenance in things, coexistent synthesis of equal and opposite complementarities of positive and negative, activiser of speech, lord of the thunderbolt and the golden light of the day and the year. 
5223 :Indra, lord omnipotent, raised the sun high up in the heavens for expansive light and vision. With the rays of the sun, He forms and moves the cloud for rain. 
5224 :Indra, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, we hold the yajna and distil the soma of life in your service. Come, grace this holy seat of my yajna dedicated to you, watch my performance, enjoy the soma, and protect and promote the yajna for the beauty and joy of life. 
5225 :Let the radiant waves of cosmic energy engaged in the service of divinity bring you here. Pray listen to our songs of prayer and adoration. 
5226 :Dedicated to divinity and the divine voice, meditating on the divine presence with concentrated mind and soul, living in truth the beauty of life and expressing the ecstasy of soma, we invoke and wait for Indra, original maker and lover of soma, to come and bless us. 
5227 :Pious souls in meditation commune with the great and gracious lord of existence immanent in the steady universe and transcendent beyond. Brilliant are they with the lord of light and they shine in the heaven of bliss. 
5228 :Scholars of science dedicated to Indra study and meditate on the lord’s omnipotence of light, fire and wind, and harness the energy like two horses to a chariot, both beautiful, equal and complementary as positivenegative currents, fiery red, powerful and carriers of people. 
5229 :Children of the earth, know That who creates light and knowledge for the ignorant in darkness and gives form and beauty to the formless and chaotic, and regenerate yourselves by virtue of the men of knowledge and passion for action. 
5230 :The rays of the sun (like the banners of a mighty monarch) carry the brilliance of light, revealing the omnipresence of the omniscient Lord Supreme of the universe. 
5231 :And, as thieves of the night steal away at dawn, so do all those stars steal away alongwith the darkness of the night so that the world may see only the sun, lord supreme of the heavens. 
5232 :O that I could see the banners of the Lord of sunbeams, the rays of the sun, alongwith other people, blazing like the explosions of fire in heaven. 
5233 :O Sun, light of the world, creator of light and Light Itself, it is you alone who light the lights of the universe and reveal the worlds. You are the saviour, you are the redeemer, taking us across the seas of existence. 
5234 :Lord Light of the world, to the noblest powers of nature and humanity, to the people in the business of life, to the people in general, you rise directly and reveal your presence directly in their heart and soul so that the world may see the light divine directly through their experience. 
5235 :Lord purifier and sanctifier, with the eye with which you watch the mighty world of dynamic activity and humanity holding everything in equipoise, with the same kind and benign eye pray watch and bless us. 
5236 :O sun, watching the species of various forms and traversing and measuring the wide worlds of existence by days and nights, you move to the regions of light and heaven. So may the Lord of Light Supreme, we pray, watch us, guard us and sustain in measure our life and actions through successive lives and births. 
5237 :O sun, self-refulgent lord of blazing flames and universal illumination, seven are the colourful lights of glory which like seven horses draw your chariot of time across the spaces. In the same way, seven are the chhandas, metres, which reveal the light of Divinity in the sacred voice of the Veda. 
5238 :The sun, bright and illuminant, yokes the seven pure, immaculate, purifying and infallible sunbeams like horses to his chariot of motion, and with these self-yoked powers, moves on across the spaces to the regions of light. 
5239 :So does the Lord of the Universe with His laws and powers of Prakrti move the world like His own chariot of creative manifestation. 
5240 :O Sun, moving words of adoration flow and rise in love and worship to you with celebration of your splendour, like mother cows moving to their calf with love and overflowing milk. 
5241 :Loving, pure and vibrant voices of adoration rise to you and join with your splendour as mothers embrace and join their new born baby with their heart overflowing with love. 
5242 :Words of divine adoration and the discipline of diamond purity, thunder power and razor edge dedication have blest the mortal me with good health and full age, liquid refinement of love and courtesy and the life-giving milk of mother Veda. 
5243 :This earth moves round and round eastward abiding in its mother waters of the firmament and revolves round and round its father sustainer, the sun in heaven. 
5244 :The light of this sun radiates from morning till evening like the prana and apana of the cosmic body, illuminating the mighty heaven and filling the space between heaven and earth. 
5245 :Thirty stages of the day from every morning to evening does the sun rule with the rays of its light while songs of adoration are raised and offered to the mighty ‘Bird’ of heavenly space. 
5246 :When veteran saints and sages of firm conviction and dedicated will rise on the wings of vision and imagination and send up their voice of divine adoration in space, the divinities rejoice with them and the lord omnificent sends down showers of bliss. 
5247 :The lord is great and most generous. O man, send up your voice and words of adoration with sweetness, without pride and deception, let them resound in space for the lord of love and grace, and rejoice in the heaven of bliss. 
5248 :O man cleanse your voice and words, let there be no pride or deception. The lord is great and kind. He shines in every nook and comer of the world and in every form of Dharma. And as your words of prayer move, he rejoices and seeps into your heart and soul bit by bit unto completion and perfection. 
5249 :We invoke and call upon Indra eagerly as cows call for their calves in the stalls, and, with songs of adoration over night and day, we glorify him, lord glorious, omnipotent power fighting for truth against evil forces, and exhilarated with the bright soma of worship offered by celebrant humanity. 
5250 :We pray to Indra, lord of light, omnificent, hallowed with heavenly glory, universally generous like clouds of shower, and we ask for food abounding in strength and nourishment and for hundredfold and thousandfold wealth and prosperity abounding in lands, cows and the graces of literature and culture, and we pray for the gift instantly. 
5251 :O lord resplendent, I come to you and ask for that vigour and wisdom, that knowledge of reality and divinity, that prime acquisition and awareness of values by which, when the battle rages and money and materials are called for, you provide for the retired holy men, scientists, technologists and the inventors and by which you protect the man of advanced special knowledge. 
5252 :Indra, lord omnipotent of creation, I pray for the knowledge and experience of that overwhelming power and potential of yours by which you create the mighty waters and the oceans to roll and flow. That mighty power of this lord is not easily to be realised, the heaven and earth obey it, and when they move they celebrate it in the roaring and resounding music of stars and spheres. 
5253 :Who among mortals, even the most ardent of constant celebrants, can offer a new song of homage and adoration? Even those who have been singing in praise of Indra have not been able to comprehend his sublime majesty. 
5254 :Who is the seer and scholar among those who adore you, honour you by yajna, or do homage to your refulgence, that can deliberate on you and understand you? When would you, O lord of honour and glory, Indra, respond to the call of the sage who presses the soma for you? When would you grace the yajnic home of the celebrant? To the best of your intention and purpose and for whatever you wish to achieve, pray to Indra, lord of glory, world power and promotion and means of success, who gives a thousandfold wealth, honour and excellence to his celebrants. 
5255 :Like the commander of a hundred armies, with his power and force, Indra rushes forward to fight and win, and he destroys the demons of darkness and want for the charitable giver. The gifts of this universal giver of food and sustenance feed and support humanity like streams flowing down from the mountains. 
5256 :For the sake of life’s fulfilment, honour and adore Indra, renowned and mighty master and controller of the superstructure of existence, who grants desired wealth, power and honour, and augments it a thousandfold for the celebrant who seeks and works for the soma joy and excellence of life with yajnic effort. 
5257 :Hundreds of great and invincible forces of this lord almighty, protective, promotive and overladen with sustenance, power and prosperity like the pregnant cloud and abundant mountain, shower gifts of desire and fulfilment on the seekers of excellence and grace when the soma creations of the yajnic celebrants please the lord. 
5258 :Indra, destroyer of evil, darkness and suffering, we, your celebrants, having distilled the soma, spread and occupied the holy grass, sit and wait on the vedi for your presence in the flux of life as holy performers, while the flow of pure immortality continues all round in the dynamics of existence. 
5259 :Indra, Vasu, giver of peace and security in selfsettlement, while the soma of faith and love has been distilled in the heart and the devotees sing and celebrate your honour in hymns of praise, when would you, keen to join us at the celebration, come to the yajnic hall thirsting to meet the people you love and admire. 
5260 :Indra, lord of universal vision, resolute will and irresistible action, ruler and commander of the world’s wealth, power and force, we pray, conceive, plan and bring about for the intelligent people of action and ambition a social order of golden beauty and progressive achievement, full of a hundred-fold prosperity of lands and cows, education and culture, and invincible will, strength and advancement free from indecision and delay in action Who would for certain know Indra in this created world of beauty and glory, how much power and force he wields while he rules and sustains it, Indra who wears the helmet and breaks down the strongholds of negativities with his lustrous might, the lord who shares and enjoys the soma of his own creation? Indra is generously giving, preventive, counteractive and invincible like a lion, and holds and rules the world of immense variety in motion. O lord of grandeur and majesty, as you move around everywhere by your might and lustre, pray come, bless our yajna and taste the soma of our creation. No one can restrain you, no one counter your will. 
5261 :Indra who is blazing strong, uncountered and irresistible, constant and unshakable, is ever in perfect harness for the human’s battle of existence, and if he hears the call of the celebrant, the lord of might and majesty never forsakes him, he comes, he saves, he blesses. 
5262 :All the citizens together, in order to elect an equal for the purpose of governance, create and shape Indra, the ruler, the leader who is superior to others in all battles of life, highest by noble creative action, eliminator of negative and frustrative opposition, illustrious, most vigorous and emphatic in expression, courageous and passionate in action. 
5263 :Let all intelligent people cordially welcome and felicitate Indra for the protection of the honour, integrity, beauty and culture of the nation of humanity, and when they, together, exhort the guardian of their happiness and welfare to advance the beauty of corporate life, then, committed to the values, laws and ideals of the nation, he feels exalted with lustrous courage and positive measures of defence and protection. 
5264 :Wise and vibrant sages greet the heroic ruler, Indra, giver of showers of peace and joy, and with vision of the future bow to him as the central power and force of the nation’s wheel. O brilliant and inspired people free from jealousy and calumny, smart and bold in action, do him honour with laudable performance. 
5265 :That Indra, ruler of the world, I invoke and address, illustrious, pious and true, wielder of unopposed powers, and I pray may the most generous and adorable lord of thunderous power, in response to our voice, turn to us constantly and clear our paths of advancement for the achievement of wealth, power, honour and excellence of the world. 
5266 :Indra, lord of bliss and omnipotence, the food, energy and vitality which you bear and bring from the sources of pranic energy such as sun, air, cloud and cosmic intelligence is great and admirable. O lord of power and glory, pray advance the devotees who appreciate, develop and celebrate this energy and spread the holy grass of yajna in gratitude to you, offer homage to you and develop your gifts. 
5267 :Indra, lord of glory, the light and energy, nourishment, knowledge and dynamism and all our share of natural and spiritual gifts of divinity which you bear and bring for us, all that, pray, vest in the generous yajamana, the soma maker and the giver of charity (who all keep these in creative circulation) but never in the uncreative, miserly hoarders and selfish exploiters. 
5268 :Indra, the hero who destroys Vrtra, the cloud of want and suffering, and releases the showers of plenty and prosperity, goes forward with the people for the achievement of strength and joy of the land of freedom and self-government. And him we invoke and exhort in the battles of life, great and small, so that he may defend and advance us in all our struggles for progress and lead us to victory. 
5269 :warrior taking on many enemies and oppositions at a time. Even the small, you raise to greatness. You lead the creative and generous yajamana to knowledge and power. Hero of the battles of existence, may your wealth, power and honour grow higher and higher. 
5270 :When battles confront the nation, means and money are raised and prizes won for the brave. Commander of the forces, yoke the forces exuberant and raging for war. Destroy the enemy. Settle the victorious in wealth and peace. Indra, pray settle us in peace and comfort. 
5271 :Indra, lord of wealth, power and generosity, in every joy of life, you are the giver. You are the giver of plenty of cows and abundance of light and sense. Lord of simple, natural and divine action of yajna, may he provide hundreds of kinds of wealth for us and bless us with both of his hands generously. Lord of wealth and glory, bring us the wealth of joy, dignity and glory and let us shine with honour. 
5272 :Brave hero, be with us in this holy yajnic programme of the land of freedom and sovereignty for the creation of wealth, power and joy. Join us and let us celebrate together. Lord of abundant wealth, power and joy you are. May we, we pray, know you and be with you at the closest. Be our saviour, our protector, our promoter, so that we may creatively realise all our desires and ambitions. 
5273 :Indra, lord of life and spirit, these living beings, yours all, do homage to you and augment the wealth and glory of the entire world. Lord and master of the people, you know the very heart of them inside out. Bring us the wealth of knowledge and spirit. Restore the wealth and knowledge of those ungenerous miserables who have lost it. 
5274 :Just as the generous mother cow is milked for the person in need of nourishment, so every day for the sake of light and knowledge we invoke and worship Indra, lord omnipotent of light and life, maker of beautiful forms of existence and giver of protection and progress. 
5275 :Indra, lord of light, protector of yajnic joy, promoter of sense and mind, come to our yajna, accept our homage of soma and give us the light and ecstasy of the soul. 
5276 :Indra, lord of light and knowledge, come, so that we know you at the closest of those who are established in you and hold you in their heart and vision. Come, lord of life, come close, forsake us not. 
5277 :Indra, lord ruler of the world, protector of life and humanity, leader of a hundred noble actions and master of knowledge, for our protection and progress, protect, defend, govern and promote the strongest and most prosperous, most brilliant and honourable, and the most wakeful and vigilant powers and people, and thus defend and safeguard the honour, happiness and excellence of the nation. 
5278 :Indra, ruler of the world, master of a hundred noble acts of governance, your powers and organs of perception are operating among all the five classes of people, i.e., teachers and intellectuals, ruling powers and defence forces, producers and business men, ancillaries, and others, I accept and honour all these as powers and forces of yours. 
5279 :Indra, ruler and protector of the world, the assets of the dominion are high and rising. Hold and govern this formidable wealth, honour and excellence of the nation. And let us all, we pray, raise and exalt your courage and power, honour and glory. 
5280 :Indra, lord of might, ruler of the clouds, wielder of the thunderbolt and refulgent as the sun, come to us from far and from near, wherever you are. And whatever or wherever your abode, from there come to us here and now. 
5281 :Indra, light of life, dear as breath of vitality, mighty great, blazing as the sun which is stable in its orbit and enlightens and watches us all as it moves, may, we pray, remove all fear and give us freedom. 
5282 :us with peace and comfort, and may sin and evil, we pray, never touch us either before or after, and may good alone be our share and fortune for all time. 
5283 :May Indra, lord omnipotent beyond all fear and violence, grant us freedom from all quarters of space. He watches all and he is the supreme victor over all enemies and contrarieties. 
5284 :Who would for certain know Indra in this created world of beauty and glory, how much power and force he wields while he rules and sustains it, Indra who wears the helmet and breaks down the strongholds of negativities with his lustrous might, the lord who shares and enjoys the soma of his own creation? Indra is generously giving, preventive, counteractive and invincible like a lion, and holds and rules the world of immense variety in motion. O lord of grandeur and majesty, as you move around everywhere by your might and lustre, pray come, bless our yajna and taste the soma of our creation. No one can restrain you, no one counter your will. 
5285 :Indra who is blazing strong, uncountered and irresistible, constant and unshakable, is ever in perfect harness for the human’s battle of existence, and if he hears the call of the celebrant, the lord of might and majesty never forsakes him, he comes, he saves, he blesses. 
5286 :Indra, destroyer of evil, darkness and suffering, we, your celebrants, have distilled the soma, spread and occupied the holy grass, we sit and wait on the vedi for your presence in the flux of life as holy performers, while the flow of pure immortality continues all round in the dynamics of existence. 
5287 :Indra, Vasu, giver of peace and security in selfsettlement, while the soma of faith and love has been distilled in the heart and the devotees sing and celebrate your honour in hymns of praise, when would you, keen to join us at the celebration, come to the yajnic hall thirsting to meet the people you love and admire? Indra, lord of universal vision, resolute will and irresistible action, ruler and commander of the world’s wealth, power and force, we pray, conceive, plan and bring about for the intelligent people of action and ambition a social order of golden beauty and progressive achievement, full of a hundred-fold prosperity of lands and cows, education and culture, and invincible will, strength and advancement free from indecision and delay in action. 
5288 :Just as the rays of light share and diffuse the radiance of the sun, so you too share and reflect the golden glories of Indra, the cosmic soul. Let us meditate on the divine presence and for our share enjoy the ecstasy of bliss vibrating in the world of past and future creation by virtue of Indra’s omnipresent majesty. 
5289 :Adore and meditate on Indra, giver of wealth, honour, excellence and bliss. Infinite is his generosity, unsatiating, auspicious his gifts. He does not displease the devotee, does not hurt his desire and prayer, he inspires his mind for the reception of divine gifts. 
5290 :O Surya, light of life, you are truly great, lord indestructible, you are undoubtedly great. O lord of reality, highest real, great is your glory, adorable. In truth, you are great, refulgent and generous. 
5291 :O Surya, lord self-refulgent, by honour and fame you are great. In truth, you are great, generous lord, by your grandeur among the divinities. Lord of pranic energy, destroyer of the evil, prime high priest of creation in cosmic dynamics, omnipresent and infinite, light unsurpassable, eternal. 
5292 :The sweetest of honeyed songs of praise and vibrations of homage rise to you flying like victorious, unviolated and invincible chariots laden with gold heading for higher destinations. 
5293 :Brilliant scholars and sages as well as brave heroes of the human nation and loving and intelligent citizens of the land, praising and exalting Indra in one vaulting voice, rise and reach the presence of the lord in a world their own like rays of the sun filling the world of space they know. 
5294 :High rises the victor’s share of excellence as his wealth of life increases when Indra, guardian protector of the brave, vests his love of victory and soma-sublimity with the will and expertise of yajnic living. And then no enemies can ever defeat and destroy him. 
5295 :Offer perfect, well structured and graceful mantric thoughts, adorations and actions to the divinities in yajnic programmes of creativity and development. Then even the oldest bounds of will and passion take the yajaka across the seas who dedicates his actions to the service of Indra. 
5296 :You love and honour the brave, you are brave yourself, you are definite in intention and undisturbed in attitude. You are now ripe for the perfection of mind to experience the soul’s beatitude in divine presence. 
5297 :Indra, generous lord of the wealth and glory of the world, thus by practice and meditation, is divine generosity cultivated and achieved by all those who bear and bring the offerings to you. O lord of power and immense generosity, be my friend and companion. 
5298 :and excellence of life, just as a vibrant scholar of divine knowledge never slackens into sloth from wakefulness, so you too should never be slothful and half asleep. Be ever wakeful, enjoy and guard the distilled essence of knowledge and creative achievement of wealth, honour and excellence. 
5299 :Verily the divine voice of Indra, Supreme Lord of Omniscience, is Shabda Brahma, the richest treasure of eternal truth, generous mother of the language of existence, and great. It is an abundant branch of the divine tree laden with ripe fruit for the faithful devotee and yajnic giver. (The other branch is Jag ad Brahma, Existence Itself on its own. Parama Brahma is the Tree.) Indra, lord omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent, such are your wondrous works and attributes, such are your powers, protections and promotions, of life, knowledge and happiness for a person like me. They are ever abundant for the faithful and generous devotee dedicated to love and service. 
5300 :Such are the songs of praise, adoration and celebration of this lord of life, light and power, sweet, enchanting and elevating, offered in honour of Indra, creator, protector and promoter of life and its joy. 
5301 :Indra, lord of adamantine will and generous disposition like clouds of rain, we celebrate and glorify that power and heavenly joy of yours which is virile and generous, heroic in battles and steadfast against challenges, creative in the worlds of existence and gracious in advancement and gifts of bliss. 
5302 :We celebrate and adore that power and divine joy of yours by which you reveal the light of life to the mortals from generation to generation and, exalted by which, you shine and rule over the yajnic dynamics of this universe. 
5303 :That divine power and joyous generosity of yours, today, saints and scholars of the holy Word and song sing and celebrate as ever before. O lord, conquer and control the waters of space collected in the mighty clouds and let them flow day by day. 
5304 :O celebrants, glorify Indra, universally invoked and praised, the lord who blazes with light and power, serve him with words and actions and let him shine forth in your life and achievement. 
5305 :Glorify Indra, who sustains the cosmic yajna in the two worlds, your life here and hereafter, whose cosmic potential sustains heaven, earth and the middle regions, who moves and controls the mighty gusts of winds and motions of mountainous clouds, and who gives us heavenly showers of rain for joy and vital energies. 
5306 :Indra, universally praised and celebrated, you rule and shine alone, one, unique, without an equal, to destroy darkness, ignorance and adversities, to control and contain what is won and to manage what is heard and what ought to be heard. 
5307 :O lord sublime, eternal, first and most excellent, we, bearing almost nothing substantial but praying for protection and advancement, invoke you in our battle of life for food, energy, knowledge and ultimate victory. 
5308 :We approach you for protection and success in every undertaking. O lord youthful and blazing brave who can challenge and subdue any difficulty, pray come to our help. Indra, friends and admirers of yours, we depend on you alone as our sole saviour and victorious lord and choose to pray to you only as the lord supreme. 
5309 :O friends, for the peace, freedom, progress and protection of you all, I pray to the same Indra, lord almighty, who has provided this beautiful world of joy for us since the very time of creation. 
5310 :Haryasvam satpatim carsamsaham sa hi smd yo amandata. A tu nah sa vayati gavyamasvyam stotrbhyo maghava satam. 
5311 :He alone is happy indeed and prospers who glorifies Indra, lord of the moving universe, protector and promoter of truth and reality and ruler and justicier of humanity, who, lord almighty, weaves for us this web of a hundredfold variety of earthly provision and all attainable possibility for the celebrants. 
5312 :Sing Brhatsama hymns in adoration of Indra, vibrant spirit of the universe and giver of fulfilment, grand and infinite, source ordainer and keeper of the law of universal Dharma, giver and protector of knowledge and karma, the lord adorable. 
5313 :Indra, you are the lord supreme dominant over all, you give light to the sun, you are the maker of the universe, you are the one adorable light and spirit of the world, you are the one great and glorious life of the world. 
5314 :Refulgent with your own light you pervade the regions of bliss and beatify the glory of heaven. Indra, the lights and divinities of the world vye and struggle for friendship with you. 
5315 :O celebrants, glorify Indra, universally invoked and praised, the lord who blazes with light and power, serve him with words and actions and let him shine forth in your life and achievement. 
5316 :Glorify Indra, who sustains the cosmic yajna in the two worlds, your life here and the life hereafter, whose cosmic potential sustains heaven, earth and the middle regions, who moves and controls the mighty gusts of winds and motions of mountainous clouds, and who gives us heavenly showers of rain for joy and vital energies. 
5317 :Indra, universally praised and celebrated, you rule and shine alone, one, unique, without an equal, to destroy darkness, ignorance and adversities, to control and contain what is won and to manage what is heard and what ought to be heard. 
5318 :Let us proceed and win our goals across these regions of the world and let all divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity be favourable to us. Indra, the sun, the wind, and electric energy of the firmament with all year’s phases of the sun supports, strengthens and promotes our yajna, our body’s health and our future generations. 
5319 :May Indra, ruling power of the world, with all natural and human forces, winds and stormy troops, across the suns phases over the year, be the protector and promoter of our health of body and social organizations. Divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity attain to their divine positivity when they come together to preserve, protect and promote the forces of creativity and destroy the demonic forces of negativity and destruction. 
5320 :When the divinities and nobilities of nature offer their yajnic homage at their best to Indra, then they see and experience divine inspiration and vigour descending on them from Divinity through nature to humanity. Thus may we too offer adoration and seek to share divine favour and inspiration fit for dedicated humanity and live a full happy hundred years blest with noble and heroic generations of progeny. 
5321 :Dear friend, the one sole lord who gives everything in life to the man of charity and generosity is Indra, supreme ruler of the world, who is constant, unmoved and unchallenged. 
5322 :Dear friend, when would Indra, lord of wealth, power and justice, shake the miserly, uncreative, ungenerous and selfish person like a weed? Who knows? And would he listen to our prayers? Any time! Dear friend, it is Indra, creator of energy, vitality and the joy of soma, who, for the sake of many, does special favours to you and makes you shine, and it is he, again, who controls violent force, that which could be anywhere. 
5323 :Indra, lord most potent, highest protector and promoter of the beauty and joy of life, that ecstatic passion of yours which universally pervades, manifests and reveals your might and glory and by which you destroy the negative forces of life, we adore and pray for. 
5324 :That omnipotent passion and ecstasy of yours by which you protect and promote the individual soul working with ten faculties of perception and volition, the unchallengeable wind and electric energy, the solar radiation which shakes and vibrates, and the ocean of water on earth and in space, that we adore, that we pray for. 
5325 :That power and passion of ecstasy by which you energise and move the river and the sea, the earths and waters like rolling chariots to flow and follow the path of the divine law of nature, that we adore, that we pray for, to follow the path of truth and yajna ourselves too. 
5326 :Indra, come, take us over as your own. Dear and giver of fulfilment you are, all dominant by nature, character and action, inconceivably open and bright, expansive and unbounded all round like a cloud of vapour, lord and master of the light of heaven. 
5327 :Lord eternal and ever true, lover, protector and promoter of the beauty and joy of existence, you are higher and greater than both heaven and earth. Indra, omnipotent lord and master of the light of heaven, you are the inspirer and giver of advancement to the pursuer of the knowledge, beauty and power of the soma reality Indra, you are catalyser, breaker and maker, of the eternal forms of existence in cosmic dynamics, destroyer of the destroyer and promoter of thoughtful people. You are the guardian of the light of life, sustainer of the heavens of joy. 
5328 :And O high priest of the creative yajna of love and non-violence, offer the most delightful and ever exhilarating of honey sweets of the soma of faith and devotion to Indra, since thus is how the mighty hero is served and worshipped. 
5329 :Indra, glorious lord president of the moving worlds of existence, no one ever by might or by commanding adoration has been able to equal, much less excel, the prime worship offered to you. 
5330 :O people, we, seekers of honour and fame, invoke and adore the protector and promoter of your food, energies and victories by assiduous congregations of yajna and thereby exalt the splendour and glory of the lord supreme. 
5331 :Come friends all together and let us adore Indra, lord and leader worthy of joint worship and exaltation, who, by himself alone, rules over all peoples of the world. 
5332 :Sing delightful songs of adoration in words more delicious than the taste of ghrta and sweetness of honey in honour of Indra, heavenly lord of light, who loves sweet speech and never feels satiated with songs of Let us sing in adoration of Indra whose wondrous deeds of divinity are unbounded, whose potential is unrestricted, and whose generosity radiates over the world is light of the sun. 
5333 :Like the sage of perfect mental and moral discipline, worship Indra, constant lord of eternity without fluctuation, omnipresent power over universal energy, controller and guide of the evolution of the universe, omnificent lord giver of a prosperous household to the generous devotees of yajna. 
5334 :O child of the holy sage of mental and moral discipline, verily worship Indra only, the lord ever new though eternal, worshipped as the tenth supreme over all among humans, lord omniscient solely worthy of the worship of dynamic humanity. 
5335 :O lord of the thunderbolt of justice and right action, you know and wield the counter-active measures against adversities just as the sun, purifier of nature’s impurities, has the capacity to counter them day by day. 
5336 :The yajamana who performs yajna and distils the soma prays for a home and gets one. Organising the yajna and the distillation of the soma of joy and prosperity, he drives away many envious enemies by yajna, drives the enemies of noble people away. The organiser of yajna, fast, intelligent and wise, open, free and fearless, wants to create a hundred things, and Indra, lord of creation, power and generosity, creates and gives blissful wealth for the yajnic people, yes, the lord blesses with the gift of wealth, peace and joy. 
5337 :O Maruts, brave heroes of earth and space vibrant as waves of energy, may your ancient and eternal powers and potentials and ours, and our honour and fame never wear away outmoded, and never forsake us. Whatever is yours, wondrous and excellent, ancient and yet ever new from age to age, what is imperishable from the eternal Voice and your proclamations, fix that within us deep in the mind, so it is difficult to surpass, unchallengeable. 
5338 :I worship, serve and meditate on Agni, lord of light and knowledge, spirit of life and heat and inspiration of noble action, yajaka, generous giver, treasure of wealth and universal shelter, inspirer and creator of courage and courageous action as the sun, omniscient lord of all that is bom in existence, master of knowledge as the supreme scholar of the Veda, organiser of yajna with love and non-violence with divine knowledge and awareness, refulgent with heavenly light and power, loving and consuming with flames of fire, and light, the blaze of the purest and most powerful ghrta offered into the fire of yajna, physical, mental and spiritual all. 
5339 :O Maruts, children of the Lord sustainer of the world, powers natural and divine, leaders of humanity united by yajna, moving by the right path at the right time at speed of the winds, creating and achieving the objects of desire, crystalline pure and lovely in colours of beauty, seating yourselves on the holy grass of the vedi, drink the soma distilled from the purest light of heaven. 
5340 :Agni, ‘vipra’, brilliant scholar of the dynamics of nature and human society, speak of the laws of nature and psycho-social dynamics and inaugurate and direct the yajna of creation and production here. Inspired and passionate for holy action, be seated on the vedi, establish yourself in the three fields of earth, sky and space and be sure and specific on description, application and valuation of knowledge human and divine with prayer and gratitude to the Lord Omniscient. Achieve the planned targets of blissful creativity and development, taste the sweets of yajnic success and be happy that you have played your part of life’s action for your people. 
5341 :Indra, lord of wealth and power, ruler of the world, this soma is such that it would strengthen and augment the wealth and power of your body and soul. It is the very patience and fortitude and the lustre of your personality, as broad and clear as daylight, collected and consecrated in your very arms. It is distilled, seasoned, preserved and served for you only. Drink of it as a gift from the Brahmana, expert of science and bio-technology, and be happy. 
5342 :Whom I ever invoke and worship, him alone I invoke and serve and worship now. He alone is the giver, he alone is the master, he alone is the ruler, he alone for sure is the lord worthy of invocation, invitation, service, yajna and worship. O lord giver of the wealth of life, abundant and infinite, receive and drink this honey sweet of soma prepared and refined by the loving, faithful and non-violent priests according to the seasons. Take it from the sacred cup and drink to your heart’s desire. 
5343 :Just as the generous mother cow is milked for the person in need of nourishment, so every day for the sake of light and knowledge we invoke and worship Indra, lord omnipotent of light and life, maker of beautiful forms of existence and giver of protection and progress. 
5344 :Indra, lord of light, protector of yajnic joy, promoter of sense and mind, come to our yajna, accept our homage of soma and give us the light and ecstasy of the soul. 
5345 :Indra, lord of light and knowledge, come, so that we know you at the closest of those who are established in you and hold you in their heart and vision. Come, lord of life, come close, forsake us not. 
5346 :Keep off the malicious maligner. Go even far, farthest to Indra, lord of divine knowledge, love and kindness, light and vision, experience and wisdom, who is good and the best choice for you and me and your friends. Go, ask, and pray. 
5347 :Indra, lord of light and bliss, may the wise and visionaries who cherish the divine in their heart speak to us. Let the others, ignorant, malicious and maligners be off from here. 
5348 :Let us pray and seek the protection of Indra, lord of might unchallengeable, so that men of knowledge and wisdom bring us the voice of divinity and even those who oppose appreciate and speak well of us. 
5349 :Indra, lord of knowledge and power, give us the secret of the speed of motion for the giant leap forward in progress. Bless us with the wealth of the nation’s yajna exciting for the people and joyous for our friends. 
5350 :Hero of a hundred yajnic projects, having accomplished the programme and having drunk the soma of success, concentrate and consolidate as the light of the sun and be the breaker of the clouds of rain, and then advance and promote the wealth and defence of the nation through the battles of progress. 
5351 :Indra, lord of light and power, hero of a hundred yajnic creations, we celebrate your glory of speed and success in the battles of humanity for the achievement of the wealth of life and prosperity of the people. 
5352 :People of the land and children of Indra, sing and celebrate the glories of Indra, lord supreme of life and light, great and glorious, creator and protector of wealth, saviour pilot across the seas, and friend of the makers of soma. 
5353 :Friends and celebrants of song divine, come, sit together and join to meditate (on life, divinity, humanity, science and spirituality, and freedom), and sing in thankful praise of Indra, lord of life and energy. 
5354 :Friends and comrades in study and meditation, when you have distilled the essence of soma, life and spirit present at the heart of things, then sing in praise of Indra, closest at hand of things in heaven and earth, and ruler dispenser of the fruits of love and desire. 
5355 :Indra, life and energy of the universe, is at the heart of our meditation. That is the spirit and secret of the wealth of the world. That is the inspiration at the centre of our thought and intelligence. May that lord of life and energy come and bless us with gifts of knowledge and power in our joint endevours. 
5356 :Sing in honour of that Indra in the field of whose power and force no enemies can have the courage to stand in opposition and sustain themselves. 
5357 :All these bright and pure creations of the soma- yajna of science and meditation, sweet and vitalising as nectar-sweet delicacies of milk and curds (are created by Indra through His light and wind energy) and flow for the beneficiary, humanity, for their pleasure, protection and promotion. 
5358 :Indra, noble soul of purity and yajnic meditation, hero of a hundred acts of goodness, for a drink of the soma of Lord Indra’s creation, rising to new honour and grandeur every day, take a new birth into higher knowledge every moment. 
5359 :Indra, noble soul, high-priest of yajna and the divine voice, may all these brilliant creations of lightning speed be good and beneficial to you and humanity. May they bring bliss and peace to you, prince of knowledge and grandeur. 
5360 :Indra, supreme lord of omnipotence and majesty, the Stoma hymns of the Veda celebrate your glory. Lord infinite of countless acts of creation, the Uktha hymns sing of your power and action. So may all our songs of devotion and homage light up your presence and grandeur all round. 
5361 :Indra, whose omnipotence and protection is infinite and imperishable, may, we pray, bless us with this thousand-fold knowledge and power of science in which are contained all the secrets of nature’s vitality. 
5362 :Indra, lord adorable in sacred song, let no mortal hate or injure our body and mind from anywhere. Keep off hate, violence and murder far away from us. You are the ruler, ordainer and dispenser of justice and punishment. 
5363 :Pious souls in meditation commune with the great and gracious lord of existence immanent in the steady universe and transcendent beyond. Brilliant are they with the lord of light and they shine in the heaven of bliss. 
5364 :Scholars of science dedicated to Indra study and meditate on the lord’s omnipotence of light, fire and wind, and harness the energy like two horses to a chariot, both beautiful, equal and complementary as positivenegative currents, fiery red, powerful and carriers of people. 
5365 :Children of the earth, know That who creates light and knowledge for the ignorant in darkness and gives form and beauty to the formless and chaotic, and regenerate yourselves by virtue of the men of knowledge and passion for action. 
5366 :Bearing the sacred vapours of yajna as is their wont and nature, the winds rise to the sky, hold the clouds in their womb, and after the rain carry on the cycle with the sun-rays and yajna-fire. 
5367 :The mighty sun with its piercing rays breaks down things in the sky, and the wind with its currents after the sunbeams reconstructs and replaces new forms of things in the sky. 
5368 :Just as noble scholars develop and brighten up their generous mind and intelligence after the principles of Vedic revelation, so do the Maruts, currents of energy, intensify, magnify and adorn the sound that is produced and heard. 
5369 :Marut, wind energy, is seen while moving alongwith the indomitable sun, both beautiful and joyous, divinities coexistent, equal in splendour by virtue of omnipresent Indra, Lord Supreme. 
5370 :The yajnic dynamics of nature’s currents of energy, Maruts, so potent and effective, illuminate the world and do homage to the Lord of creation with the immaculate blazing radiations of glorious sun light. 
5371 :The currents of energy, Maruts, travel up from here, the earth, to the region of the sun, and from up there down to the earth. And in this space they sustain all the objects of the world and all the voices divine and human. 
5372 :From here we rise to the sun, and to Indra, lord omnipotent blazing in the sun, with prayers, with homage and oblations, Indra who is greater and higher than the earth, the skies and the heavens and rules over all these. 
5373 :The singers of Vedic hymns worship Indra, infinite lord of the expansive universe, Indra, the sun, lord of light, Indra, vayu, maruts, currents of energy, and Indra, the universal divine voice, with prayers, mantras, actions and scientific research. 
5374 :Indra, the omnipresent Spirit, Indra, the universal energy of vayu or maruts, and Indra, the solar energy, the bond of unity and sustenance in things, coexistent synthesis of equal and opposite complementarities of positive and negative, activiser of speech, lord of the thunderbolt and the golden light of the day and the year. 
5375 :Indra, lord omnipotent, raised the sun high up in the heavens for expansive light and vision. With the rays of the sun, He forms and moves the cloud for rain. 
5376 :Indra, lord of light and omnipotence, in a thousand battles of life and prize contests, pray protect us with bright blazing ways of protection and advancement. 
5377 :omnipotent, we call upon sun and wind, Indra, mighty breaker of the clouds, friend in darkness, wielder of the thunderbolt. 
5378 :Indra, lord of the universe, light of the world, generous lord of wealth, irresistible wielder of power, generous giver of showers, grant us the yajnic prosperity of life and open the doors of freedom and salvation at the end. 
5379 :On success in battle after battle, follow songs of celebration in honour of Indra, lord wielder of the thunderbolt, and I love to go on and on with the song without end. 
5380 :As the virile bull leads the herd it rules, so does Indra, generous lord indomitable and ruler of the world, inspire and lead His children to joy and freedom. 
5381 :One and only one without a second is Indra, lord supreme of the universe, the lord who rules and guides humanity, showers treasures of wealth, and sustains and ultimately disposes the five orders of the universe. 
5382 :For the sake of you all of humanity, we invoke and worship Indra, the one lord ruler over the universe, and we pray He may be with us in vision in a state of absolute bliss. 
5383 :Indra, lord supreme of power and glory, bless us with the wealth of life and well-being that gives us the superiority of action over sufferance, delight and victory, courage and endurance, excellence and generosity, and leads us on way to progress under divine protection. 
5384 :Indra, lord of power and glory, give us that strength of life and character whereby, under your blessed protection, we may hold back the enemy, evil and darkness with less than a blow of the fist and less than a dart of the lance. 
5385 :Indra, lord of might and splendour, under your divine protection, may we develop, we pray, strong and sophisticated weapons of defence so that fighting battles of mutual contest we may win the prize of victory. 
5386 :Indra, lord of might, protection and progress, joined as we are with you in spirit, may we, with our heroes, shotsmen and missiles, challenge, fight out and win over our contestants in battle. 
5387 :Indra is great, supreme and transcendent, self- refulgent like the sun, extensive like space and more. May all the power and grandeur be for the lord of justice and the thunderbolt. May all be dedicated to Him. 
5388 :Men of valour and heroism engage in battles, men of knowledge and piety, in learned gatherings and in the training of youth. 
5389 :Indra, the sun, is the womb of life, it feeds and promotes the life-giving vegetation. Just as the sea and the space-ocean of vapours augment the waters, the wide earth generates and promotes life, the throat cavity sustains prana, and prana promotes speech, so does the sun nourish and promote life, soma and joy. 
5390 :tt^t iter ^im' mrwft j iW41 Tnft i yrz&n vn^i ii x II Verily the Divine Voice of Indra, Supreme Lord of Omniscience, is Shabda Brahma, the richest treasure of eternal truth, generous mother of the language of existence and great. It is an abundant branch of the divine tree laden with ripe fruit for the faithful devotee and yajnic giver. 
5391 :Indra, lord omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent, such are your wondrous works and attributes, such are your powers, protections and promotions, of life, knowledge and happiness for a person like me. They are ever abundant for the faithful and generous devotee dedicated to love and service. 
5392 :Such are the songs of praise, adoration and celebration of this lord of life, light and power, sweet, enchanting and elevating, offered in honour of Indra, creator, protector and promoter of life and its joy. 
5393 :Indra, lord of light and life, come with all the soma-celebrations of food, energy and joy, great as you are with majesty, power and splendour omnipresent, and give us the ecstasy of living with enlightenment. 
5394 :Scholars of eminence, in this world of Indra’s yajnic creation, come up for the sake of joyous humanity and accomplish all those works of creation and construction which are needed for its prosperity and well-being. 
5395 :Indra, Lord omniscient of universal presence, light and vision, with joyous songs of praise and celebration we invoke you and dedicate ourselves to you as our constant friend and guide. Come lord, and give us the bliss of existence in our yajnic acts of creation. 
5396 :Indra, lord of light and splendour, the songs of divinity reveal and manifest you in your glory, protector of the universe and generous rain-giver of favours and kindness. And I too, in response, celebrate your magnificence and magnanimity without satiety. 
5397 :Indra, lord of light and glory, creator giver of wondrous beauty, wealth and joy, infinite, mighty and supreme, whatever is worthy of choice in the world of your creation, grant us here and now. 
5398 :Indra, lord of light and infinite power, guide and inspire us on way to the wealth of life and divinity, zealous seekers of love, honour and excellence as we are. 
5399 :Indra, infinite lord of life and light, wealth and honour, grant us a full life of knowledge and divine speech, wealth of food and energy, great reputation, high and inexhaustible honour, and the vision of Infinity. 
5400 :Indra, lord of honour, wealth and power, grant us great honour and knowledge, wealth and happiness of a thousand sort, a strong economy and a mighty force of chariots (moving on land and sea and in the air). 
5401 :For our defence, protection and advancement, we invoke and celebrate in song with homage, Indra, lord protector of wealth, ruler of the earth, fire, breath and other sustainers of life, self-revealed and honoured in Rks, and the immanent ruler and mover of everything. 
5402 :Even if a person is opposed to faith in Indra and is an enemy of the pious, but (on repentance) offers sincere homage to Him, Great Lord and universal home and haven of everything of the world, worshipped in every act of piety, he is saved. 
5403 :(ii) The pious, and even impious, if one offers homage to Him, Great Lord who is the haven and home of everything in the world, worshipped in every act of piety, he is saved. 
5404 :In all their yajnic projects of creation and development and in their acts of piety, all the liberal minded people and all seekers of heavenly bliss, individually as well as together, serve you and abide by you, sole one universal lord of existence. To the same one lord, we too belong, and we too love, meditate on and serve you, Lord, with faith as the very centre of cosmic energy and as the saviour ship for crossing over the ocean of existence. All the people bom and living on earth in their mortal existence and all the stars and planets in their songs and dance of adoration serve and worship the Lord as Indra, light of the world like the sun. 
5405 :Indra, lord of might and prosperity, wedded couples, keen for protection and advancement, united with you and going out in pursuit of their efforts to promote the wealth of cows, development of land and related knowledge, extend your glory and eliminate their want and suffering, since you inspire and exhort both men and women going out and achieving the light and joy of life, when you open out and wield for action the thunderbolt of justice and protection, so generous, promotive and friendly to you and the people. 
5406 :Indra, lord of light, now listen and accept this our joyous celebration of the light of the dawn, know this prayer and, O shower of light and joy, accept our invocation and holy offerings since, O wielder of the thunderbolt, lord of generosity, you keep awake for us for the elimination of violence. Listen to this newest prayer of mine made in full knowledge in worship, listen and accept this latest thought and petition. 
5407 :O lord of honour and excellence, wise and brave, all these yajnic acts of service and adoration are for you. All these acts of holy creation and development for progress I do, are for your honour and majesty. You are the ruler and sustainer of the world, accepted and adorable for the leading people of the world. 
5408 :Indra, lord of blazing splendour, destroyer of suffering and darkness, adored by the world, the people of the world acknowledge your grandeur but they comprehend it not, much less equal and surpass. Nor can they surpass, equal or even comprehend your power and potential or your munificence. 
5409 :Bear and bring homage, assistance and cooperation and offer positive thoughts and advice to Indra, your leader and ruler. Great is he, promoter of great people and the common wealth, and a leader wideawake with deep and distant foresight. O leader and ruler of the land, be good to the settled ancient people and take care of the farming communities and other professionals so that all feel happy and fulfilled without frustration. 
5410 :When Indra, glorious lord ruler of the world rides his golden chariot of state which complementary forces draw on the course with the energy of solar rays in nature and the light and loyalty of leading citizens in society, then he is celebrated as universal master of the common wealth and the ruler and protector of lasting power, prosperity and honour of the world.3. When Indra, glorious lord ruler of the world rides his golden chariot of state which complementary forces draw on the course with the energy of solar rays in nature and the light and loyalty of leading citizens in society, then he is celebrated as universal master of the common wealth and the ruler and protector of lasting power, prosperity and honour of the world. 
5411 :The real shower is that when with his own essential lustre and with his complementary forces Indra sprinkles and fills the waving greenery on earth with life energy, when the divine presence pervades happy homes and weaves them into a happy web of life on earth with sweets of life, vibrates with power and shakes contradictory forces as the storm shakes the forest.4. The real shower is that when with his own essential lustre and with his complementary forces Indra sprinkles and fills the waving greenery on earth with life energy, when the divine presence pervades happy homes and weaves them into a happy web of life on earth with sweets of life, vibrates with power and shakes contradictory forces as the storm shakes the forest. 
5412 :Who with one united forceful voice silences and eliminates many many hundreds of contradictory and confrontationist voices of manly violence, sabotage and destruction, that power and voice of this mighty Indra we admire and celebrate, the ruler who, like a parent power, promotes and elevates our strength, lustre and glory. Who with one united forceful voice silences and eliminates many many hundreds of contradictory and confrontationist voices of manly violence, sabotage and destruction, that power and voice of this mighty Indra we admire and celebrate, the ruler who, like a parent power, promotes and elevates our strength, lustre and glory. 
5413 :Indra, lord of glory, eternal and imperishable, protector and promoter of soma, beauty and prosperity of life, if ever we are found wanting (for our acts of omission or commission), graciously help us repair, rehabilitate and re-establish in a splendid world of a thousand cows and horses (in a state of good health and a sound economy of plenty and progress). 
5414 :Indra, lord of glory, giver of secular and sacred wealth and well-being, protector and supporter of our struggle for progress and prosperity, master of manpower and great action, by virtue of the divine voice and under your presence and protection, bless us to rise to a splendid state of thousand-fold good health of sound sense and knowledge and speedy progress in prosperity, transport and communication. 
5415 :Indra, glorious lord of vitality, vision and will to live, eliminate the phantom of illusion and sloth of body and mind which mislead and depress, and let us awake and rise to a splendid state of a thousand-fold brilliance of knowledge, generous prosperity and fast advancement. 
5416 :Indra, lord of glory, heroic strength and courage, let adversities go to sleep and breathe out, let good fortunes awake and prosper, and let us advance and establish in an admirable state of thousand-fold wealth and generosity, cows and horses. 
5417 :Samindra gardabham mm a nuvantam pdpayd- rnuyd. A tu na indra samsaya gosvasvesu subhrisu sahasresu tuvimagha. 
5418 :Indra, glorious lord of justice and power, upholder of truth and Dharma, discriminate and throw out that boaster shouting his praises with that vile intention of his and help us establish ourselves in a splendid state of thousand-fold purity and truth with wealth of cows and horses. 
5419 :The wind blows over the forest and clusters of lotus, over and across the world and soars high with the rays of light in waves up and down. Indra, lord of light and winds, commanding the wealth of the worlds, inspire and establish us in a splendid state of thousand beauties, generosities of the cow and mother earth and the speed of winds. 
5420 :Indra, lord of the world’s wealth and glory, silence the wail of lamentations, crush the spirit of evil, and inspire and establish us in a splendid state of thousand-fold purity of conduct, free dominion over the earth and meteoric speed of progress and attainment. 
5421 :Indra, lord of might and prosperity, wedded couples, keen for protection and advancement, united with you and going out in pursuit of their efforts to promote the wealth of cows, development of land and related knowledge, extend your glory and eliminate their want and suffering, since you inspire and exhort both men and women going out and achieving the light and joy of life when you open out and wield for action the thunderbolt of justice and protection, so generous, promotive and friendly to you and the people. 
5422 :Indra, lord of power and management, the people would know and realise your usual power and valour when you, bold and challenging, would overcome the autumnal and wintry problems of life and society, reclaim the habitations, control the rivers, and restore total civic normalcy after rains, when, O lord of law and power, you tame the man who is selfish, possessive, uncreative, uncooperative and unyajnic, and when, happy at heart and creating the pleasure and joy of life, you release the great earth, release these waters and relieve these creative and cooperative people. 
5423 :Indra, lord of generosity, people loving and dedicated to you in their moods of joy praise and celebrate this valour and justice of yours, since you protect and promote them, yes, promote and advance them, so friendly to you and to all as they are. You work wonders for them in their battles of life and production for proper distribution and participation while they, desiring their share of food and wealth, rightfully hope to gain one thing after another of the flow of national wealth. 
5424 :Like the baby bird placed in the nest on the tree, waiting and watching for the mother bird, and the mother bird arriving, may this song of love and purity reach you, O complementary powers of light, Ashvins, the song, of which Indra, ruler of the world, is the inspirer and deity, manliest leader of men, who rules over the day and night of human activity. 1. Like the baby bird placed in the nest on the tree, waiting and watching for the mother bird, and the mother bird arriving, may this song of love and purity reach you, O complementary powers of light, Ashvins, the song, of which Indra, ruler of the world, is the inspirer and deity, manliest leader of men, who rules over the day and night of human activity. 
5425 :Indra, ruler of the world, manliest leader of the leaders of humanity, lord of triple splendour of knowledge, action and spiritual advancement, who command a hundred heroes by virtue of power and thunder, source of peace, advancement and bliss, may we ever abide in the light and joy of the dawn of today and of other days to come in our course of life.2. Indra, ruler of the world, manliest leader of the leaders of humanity, lord of triple splendour of knowledge, action and spiritual advancement, who command a hundred heroes by virtue of power and thunder, source of peace, advancement and bliss, may we ever abide in the light and joy of the dawn of today and of other days to come in our course of life. 
5426 :What is the most exhilarating song of prayer and presentation dear to you? O lustrous lord of force and power, come to us by the doors of yajna in response to our songs of invocation. Harbinger of power and peace, when shall I see you face to face? When will my prayer be fruitful? When shall I be able to regale you with homage and adoration, most eminent master and ruler? What is the most exhilarating song of prayer and presentation dear to you? O lustrous lord of force and power, come to us by the doors of yajna in response to our songs of invocation. Harbinger of power and peace, when shall I see you face to face? When will my prayer be fruitful? When shall I be able to regale you with homage and adoration, most eminent master and ruler? Indra, when shall we have the light, power and honour of prosperity in life? What is that order of intelligence by which you transform humans to divine consciousness of your presence? When would you reveal your presence to us in direct experience? O lord adorable ever true as friend, when would our thoughts and actions be fruitful and win your favour of food, sustenance and stability for all mankind in peace and prosperity? Indra, when shall we have the light, power and honour of prosperity in life? What is that order of intelligence by which you transform humans to divine consciousness of your presence? When would you reveal your presence to us in direct experience? O lord adorable ever true as friend, when would our thoughts and actions be fruitful and win your favour of food, sustenance and stability for all mankind in peace and prosperity? Indra, like the sun that leads from darkness to light, inspire and lead humanity to the attainment of their desire for freedom across the world, all who entertain this ambition like their love for home life earlier. O lord of infinite manifestation, bless all those people who adore you with songs of universal exhortation, who guide others to sing and pray with universal voice, and who offer homage to divinity with foods and charity in various forms. Indra, like the sun that leads from darkness to light, inspire and lead humanity to the attainment of their desire for freedom across the world, all who entertain this ambition like their love for home life earlier. O lord of infinite manifestation, bless all those people who adore you with songs of universal exhortation, who guide others to sing and pray with universal voice, and who offer homage to divinity with foods and charity in various forms. 
5427 :O Indra, lord omniscient and omnipotent, Mother Earth and the heaven of light, both ancient and eternal in the existential cycle, are created in excellent measure of form and function by your vision and power. May the delicious and refined honey drinks of soma and sumptuous foods gifted by sun and earth be exhilarating and delightful for noble humanity and for their yajnic homage to you. O Indra, lord omniscient and omnipotent, mother earth and the heaven of light, both ancient and eternal in the existential cycle, are created in excellent measure of form and function by your vision and power. May the delicious and refined honey drinks of soma and sumptuous foods gifted by sun and earth be exhilarating and delightful for noble humanity and for their yajnic homage to you. 
5428 :Let us offer the honey sweet bowl of our heart and soul overflowing with love and faith to Indra who is truly magnificent and munificent. He is the benevolent guide of humanity and supreme leader of leaders and by his powers, potentials and creative actions manifests higher and exalted over the expansive earth and space. Let us offer the honey sweet bowl of our heart and soul overflowing with love and faith to Indra who is truly magnificent and munificent. He is the benevolent guide of humanity and supreme leader of leaders and by his powers, potentials and creative actions manifests higher and exalted over the expansive earth and space. 
5429 :Indra, lord of holy light and lustre, pervades the peoples’ heart and soul within and joins them in their struggles in the world outside. The best of people since time immemorial try to win his love and friendship with homage, prayer and meditation. O lord of cosmic chariot, ruler of the world, come to us to bless us and our social order like a master of the chariot among people whom you inspire and bless with clear intelligence, noble ambition and holy enthusiasm in the right direction. Indra, lord of holy light and lustre, pervades the peoples’ heart and soul within and joins them in their struggles in the world outside. The best of people since time immemorial try to win his love and friendship with homage, prayer and meditation. O lord of cosmic chariot, ruler of the world, come to us to bless us and our social order like a master of the chariot among people whom you inspire and bless with clear intelligence, noble ambition and holy enthusiasm in the right direction. 
5430 :May Indra, lord ruler of the world, ever true, mighty bounteous and ever righteous in natural ways, come to us. May his men and powers hasten to us to help and bless. For his sake we produce energising food and distil exciting soma. Praised and appreciated and praising and appreciating, he provides us all with sustenance and protection in this world order. 
5431 :Indra, such as you are, guard us in this yajnic programme of holy living so that we may enjoy life and you too be happy with us. Guard us, pray, O Ruler, as you would the boundaries of the path of progress. Forsake us not till the end. The wise celebrant like a poet and lover sings songs of adoration and speaks words of wisdom to enlighten the simple innocents eager to learn and pray. 
5432 :The generous man of might and vision accomplishing the performance of various yajnas of science, like a poet, receiving mysteriously but surely the shower of light from above, preserving it with reverence and advancing it, creates knowledge from the light above, and then the scholars, admiring and pursuing it further by day, create seven kinds of science and technology and raise seven orders of scientists and technologists. (The mantra suggests the science of spectrum and development of light technology.) The heavenly light and paradisal bliss that is revealed by the reflections of knowledge and radiations of the sun, the greatness and sublimity of ultimate reality that is revealed and shines as the dawn of the day, the impenetrable layers of darkness that are laid open and bare, all that, Indra, the best of men and highest of leaders and divinities, does for the sake of humanity Indra, lord supreme of nature and Rtam, the law of nature, wields and sustains both heaven and earth, immeasurable though they are. He pervades both and transcends them with his power and grandeur. For this very reason, his power and grandeur too exceeds everything else of the universe since he pervades, transcends and presides over all the regions of the universe in existence. 
5433 :Indra, world ruler, commanding knowledge and power, exhausts all the possibilities of human action with his dedicated friends who, even with words of command, break down adamantine resistance and, passionate for action, open up and reveal the hidden treasures of wealth and energy of nations, like cowherds releasing cows from the stalls or winds breaking the clouds and releasing the waters. 
5434 :Indra, ruler of the world, just as, when thunderous rays of the sun break the dark cloud holding waters of rain, the earth rejoices and rivers flow to the sea, so O mighty one, all-aware and intrepidable hero, be the master protector and promoter ruler with your strength and power and, by virtue of the centrifugal force of your power and law, break open the dark strongholds of energy and action, and let the freedom and vitality of humanity flow in action unto the ocean of eternal Divinity. 
5435 :Indra, universal celebrity, when you break the cloud of hoarded potentials and your simple and straight policy of governance and administration comes into full view on earth, then you, such leader and commander of ours, sung and celebrated by scholars and scientists, manifest your power and policy further and break open the many centre-holds of human intelligence and social energy. 
5436 :In your soma yajna in the business of the world of the lord’s creation, sing together songs of homage in honour of the universally adored, ever true and eternal almighty Indra, songs which may be as pleasing to the mighty lord as to the seeker and the celebrant. 
5437 :And surely the lord giver of settlement and gifts of knowledge, power and speedy progress does not withhold the gifts since he closely hears the prayers of the devotee and responds. 
5438 :May the lord destroyer of evil, negativity and poverty visit the homestead of the prayerful devotee blest with lands, cows and divine knowledge and open up the flood gates of wealth, power and divine grace for us with his vision and powers. 
5439 :Bring us the divine vision, will and intelligence as father does for his children. O lord universally invoked and worshipped, instruct us as a teacher at this present time so that we, ordinary souls, may have the new light of life and living experience of Divinity. 
5440 :O Lord Almighty beyond fear, let not the ignorant and unknown, crooked intriguers, evil designers, and malevolent opponents in ambush attack us on way to you. May we, guided, directed and protected by you, cross the universal streams of life rushing down the slopes of time. 
5441 :tots 3 3 tt aii Di a TOtfr aro 1 .-1 toto f^r arm w: 11 ^ 11 Indra, lord of noblest virtue and knowledge, bear and bring us that best and most lustrous food for the nourishment of body and mind by which, O wondrous hero of golden helmet and wielder of thunder in hand, you may reach both this earth and this sky upto the heaven. 
5442 :For our defence and protection, O ruler, of all the brilliant, generous and mighty powers, we invoke you, illustrious challenger of the enemies of humanity. O lord giver of peace and settlement in security, crush and scatter the obdurate negative forces within and outside, and turn the opponents into friends and unquestionable supporters. 
5443 :Indra, lord of thunder, if there were a hundred heavens, and if there were a hundred earths, they would not be able to rival you. Not a thousand suns, nor heavens, earths and skies together would match you at the rise in manifestation. 
5444 :O lord of the thunderbolt, master and controller of world’s wealth, honour and power, most potent and lord of showers of generosity, with your generous and creative power and grandeur you pervade the universe. Pray protect, guide and promote us by your various and wondrous modes of protection and progress in our search for development of lands and cows, knowledge, language and culture. 
5445 :Indra, lord ruler of the world, giver of wealth and excellence, as much as you grant, so much I wish I should control and rule. I would hold it only to support the devotees of divinity and would not spend it away Every day I would wish to give wealth and support for the person who seeks to rise for enlightenment wherever he be. O lord of wealth, power and honour, there is none other than you worthy of love and attainment as our own, as father indeed. 
5446 :Indra, lord ruler of the wealth of nations, for the men of wealth, power, honour and generosity of heart, and for me too, give a home made of three metals and materials, comfortable in three seasons of summer, winter and rains, a place of rest, peace and security for complete well being. Give the light for them, keep off the blaze from them. 
5447 :Indra, lord of peace and power, exalted by words of adoration, give us warriors who, with their love of cows, lands and speech, and with the force of their mind and strength of arm and courage, press down the enemies and destroy their arms and armies, and then, also, O lord protector of our person and body politic, be with us at the closest, deep within. 
5448 :Indra, Lord Supreme of wondrous light and power, come and bless us. All these sacred objects in existence, created, energised and extended over spaces from the subtlest causes by you are sustained in your divine power. 
5449 :Indra, Lord Supreme of light and life, meditated within by the pure at heart, realised by the enlightened, distilled from the Veda and the world of existence by the visionaries, come and inspire the chant of the dedicated yajakas. 
5450 :Indra, lord and breath of life, energy and speech, come fast at the speed of light, vitalise our songs of praise in yajna and bless us with food for the body, mind and soul. 
5451 :O friends, do not worship any other but One, be firm, never remiss, worship only Indra, sole lord absolute, omnipotent and infinitely generous, and when you have realised the bliss of the lord’s presence, sing songs of divine adoration spontaneously, profusely, again and again. 
5452 :Worship Indra only, who most spontaneously rushes to the devotee for protection and upon the evil for punishment, correction or destruction. He is profusely and potently generous, free from age and decay, patient and forbearing giver of peace and nourishment to people like the meek cow and motherly earth, saviour from hate and jealousy, most adorable, giver of both material well being (abhyudaya) and spiritual freedom (nihshreyas), most munificent and majestic, and lord ruler and protector of both nature and the soul. 
5453 :Although these many people invoke you and pray for protection and progress for themselves in many different ways, yet, we pray, our adoration and prayers and all this wealth, honour and excellence bestowed upon us by you be dedicated to you and always, day and night, exalt your munificence and glory. 
5454 :O lord of might and majesty, the wise, the noble and the vibrant leaders of the people, by your grace, cross over all obstacles of their struggle for life and success, whenever they face any. Pray, come lord, and give us instant energy of versatile form for our protection and victory at the earliest. 
5455 :By word I yoke the horse powers which sense and obey the word of command. Friendly they are, extremely fast to reach the yajnic destination. Indra, lord of knowledge and power, riding the chariot which is steady and comfortable, knowing and discovering further, go close to the moon and bring the nectar of magical powers. 
5456 :O devotees of creative yajna, at the dawn of the fiery sun, offer refined and energised soma and milk into the fire of yajna in honour of Indra, generous omnipotent ruler of the worlds. Having received exhilarating soma inspiration from the sacred vedi of light, Indra, the ruler, the scholar, the human soul, proceeds to the day’s activity with passion for consecrated action every new day. 
5457 :Indra, since you have received and internalised the exhilarating soma of the mission of life at the vedi in earlier days, and love to live the taste and message of it every day, then, loving the soma by heart and soul and passionately anxious for action, take the soma offered, and inspire and exhort these yajakas for the appointed tasks of the day. 
5458 :Aware of the self, knowing your tasks in life, recognising your powers and potentials, dedicated to your yajna and your yajnic performers, you drank the soma of initiation for the realisation of your power, patience and passion, and Mother Nature spoke to you and dedicated you to the Infinite and Omnipotent. You fought with courage and fortitude, achieved wondrous peace and prosperity with your warriors for noble humanity, and rose to the skies with honour and fame. 
5459 :When you fight against those who attack, believing they are great, we shall fight out those violent enemies with arms even in hand to hand fight. And when in formation with your warring heroes around, you engage in contests, then with you we shall win that contest with honour and fame. 
5460 :Let me thus proclaim and celebrate the exploits of Indra, those accomplished earlier and the latest which the illustrious hero has achieved, when he challenged and frustrated the evil designs of the crafty enemies and became the sole winner of the soma of honour and fame. 
5461 :Indra, yours is all this living wealth around which you see under the light of sun. You are the sole master, possessor, ruler, protector and promoter of lands and cows and the lights of knowledge and culture of this earth. We ask of you and solicit wealths of the world for ourselves, because you are the giver. 
5462 :Brhaspati, lord of the vast universe, Indra, omnipotent and illustrious ruler, you are the lord of the beauty and majesty of the light of heaven and wealths of the earth. You alone rule and order these. Pray bear and bring light and wealth to bless the celebrant and the worshipper. O lord and divinities of nature and humanity, protect and promote us with all modes and means of peace, prosperity and excellence all ways all time. 
5463 :Brhaspati, the sun, which, positioned in the midst of the three regions of earth, skies and heaven, sustains the earth and other planets to the ends with its force and its rays of light and gravitation; Or, the Lord of mighty universe who is omnipresent in the worlds of earth, skies and the heavens of light and rules the universe to the ends of it with his omnipotence and Word of revelation; Or, the ruler, who, self-established in knowledge, action, and prayer, rules the world to the ends of the earth with his power and word and force of law; Or, the eminent scholar, who, master of the three realms of knowledge, Divinity, Prakrti, and the soul with the word of the Veda, rules the heart and intellect of the people to the ends of the earth with his knowledge that is power and his word: Him, lord of sweet voice and vibrations of communication and gravitation, the ancient seers, shining since the first moments of human existence, vibrant with living knowledge and holy desire, sing, celebrate and advance in human consciousness. 
5464 :O Brhaspati, vibrant scholars and heroes are they who inspire the holy and brilliant man of knowledge and centres of advancement, and help us progress in culture and achievement. O lord of progress and advancement, protect and promote the home and profession of every such person and institution, creative, brilliant, fearless, and generous and extensive in possibilities. 
5465 :Brhaspati, far off and most high is your seat of majesty whence travel and ever abide your rays of light and Law which then touch the oceans of water to break them into vapours so that, like deep dug wells and clouds laden with milky showers of honey sweets, they pour down in abundant rain in your service for you and your people. 
5466 :Brhaspati, the cosmic sun, first born of the supreme light of existence in the highest heaven, with seven mouths for consumption of materials and seven rays of light for creation of energy, born among many the mightiest, dispels the darknesses from the world with (So should the ruler and the scholar be in knowledge and power.) With a mighty jubilant roar of thunder and terrible shower of electric energy, Brhaspati breaks the crooked cloud, releases the showers, activates the production of food for holy offerings and wins the gratitude of the green earth, fertile cows and rejoicing humanity. 
5467 :Thus do we, O lord Brhaspati, offer homage to the father, divine giver of light and rain showers, with food, and salutations, yajnas and oblations of fragrant havis, and we pray that we may be blest with noble and brave progeny, and we may be masters of the wealths As an expert archer shoots a distant target with the arrow, similarly bear and offer a holy song in honour of divine Indra, thereby exalting him with the beauties of word and music. O sages, with your voice of song overwhelm the other voice, of negation. O celebrant, hold the divine Indra at heart, be happy and let the Presence shine in your peaceful soul. As an expert archer shoots a distant target with the arrow, similarly bear and offer a holy song in honour of divine Indra, thereby exalting him with the beauties of word and music. O sages, with your voice of song overwhelm the other voice, of negation. O celebrant, hold the divine Indra at heart, be happy and let the Presence shine in your peaceful soul. 
5468 :O celebrant, with constant churning of the mind, refine and energise your voice of adoration, send it in to your friend Indra, the soul within, and, like a treasurehold overflowing with wealth of light, stir it, wake up the brave soul for the gift of excellence and grandeur. O celebrant, with constant churning of the mind, refine and energise your voice of adoration, send it in to your friend Indra, the soul within, and, like a treasurehold overflowing with wealth of light, stir it, wake up the brave soul for the gift of excellence and grandeur. 
5469 :Indra, mighty soul, dear as breath of life, grand and sublime, don’t they say you are the giver of all pleasure and glory of life? Pray bless me too with the wealth of light and grandeur. I hear you are the all omnificent lord. O Lord Almighty, refine and sharpen my vision and understanding to the efficiency of divine attainment. Indra, pray bring us glory and good fortune full of wealth, power and peace.3. Indra, mighty soul, dear as breath of life, grand and sublime, don’t they say you are the giver of all pleasure and glory of life? Pray bless me too with the wealth of light and grandeur. I hear you are the all omnificent lord. O Lord Almighty, refine and sharpen my vision and understanding to the efficiency of divine attainment. Indra, pray bring us glory and good fortune full of wealth, power and peace. 
5470 :Indra, people invoke you for help in contests of righteousness and call upon you while they march to the battle. Here too, however, he alone wins his help who offers faith and yajna, because the mighty one does not love, nor recognise, the friendship of the selfish and the non-performer of Soma-yajna. Indra, people invoke you for help in contests of righteousness and call upon you while they march to the battle. Here too, however, he alone wins his help who offers faith and yajna, because the mighty one does not love, nor recognise, the friendship of the selfish and the non-performer of Soma-yajna. 
5471 :Whoever the man of discipline and practice that offers precious gifts of holy and plenteous value and performs effective and powerful soma yajna of peace and pleasure for this divine Indra, ruling lord of humanity, for him Indra dispels all darkness and evil and eliminates all his enemies at the very outset of the day, howsoever strong, violent and well-armed the enemies might be. Whoever the man of discipline and practice that offers precious gifts of holy and plenteous value and performs effective and powerful soma yajna of peace and pleasure for this divine Indra, ruling lord of humanity, for him Indra dispels all darkness and evil and eliminates all his enemies at the very outset of the day, howsoever strong, violent and well-armed the enemies might be. 
5472 :Indra, the ruler in whom we repose our faith with admiration and who assures our fulfilment in all we want and aspire for, is great and all powerful. His enemies, even though they be far off, cower with fear and flee, and to him all the wealth and powers born and produced in the land submit in reverence and loyalty. Indra, the ruler in whom we repose our faith with admiration and who assures our fulfilment in all we want and aspire for, is great and all powerful. His enemies, even though they be far off cower with fear and flee, and to him all the wealth and powers bom and produced in the land submit in reverence and loyalty. 
5473 :Indra, ruler of the world, invoked and celebrated by all, by that thunderbolt of power and justice which is lustrous and awful, throw out and keep off from us all social and environmental enemies. Give us abundance of grain, lands and cows, and for the celebrative yajna create an environment of enlightened action productive of the jewel wealth of life. Indra, ruler of the world, invoked and celebrated by all, by that thunderbolt of power and justice which is lustrous and awful, throw out and keep off from us all social and environmental enemies. Give us abundance of grain, lands and cows, and for the celebrant yajna create an environment of enlightened action productive of the jewel wealth of life. 
5474 :The ruler to whom powerful creations of generous and imaginative artists and inspiring somaic achievements of peaceful projects are offered and dedicated from within the land for highly generative purposes and social values, that ruler, commanding wealth, power and majesty, does not impose any restrictions upon such veteran and generous artists, instead he provides manifold inspiring incentives to the creative minds. The ruler to whom powerful creations of generous and imaginative artists and inspiring somaic achievements of peaceful projects are offered and dedicated from within the land for highly generative purposes and social values, that ruler, commanding wealth, power and majesty, does not impose any restrictions upon such veteran and generous artists, instead he provides manifold inspiring incentives to the creative minds. 
5475 :A veteran winner, he counters an attack and wins the opponent just as an expert player or hunter rounds up his prey and chooses the right time to strike and win. He does not restrict or restrain the philanthropist who loves divinity and spends on yajnic projects, instead, master, protector and promoter of wealth and power as he is, he blesses the giver with more and more of wealth. A veteran winner, he counters an attack and wins the opponent just as an expert player or hunter rounds up his prey and chooses the right time to strike and win. He does not restrict or restrain the philanthropist who loves divinity and spends on yajnic projects, instead, master, protector and promoter of wealth and power as he is, he blesses the giver with more and more of wealth. 
5476 :O ruler of the world, invoked and celebrated by all humanity, let us solve the difficult problem of poverty and mental and cultural backwardness by cow development, land development and proper education, and the problem of hunger, by food production across the world. Let us take the initiative first to win wealth by cooperation with other rulers, and ultimately win our goals by our own power and effort. 10. O ruler of the world invoked and celebrated by all humanity, let us solve the difficult problem of poverty and mental and cultural backwardness by cow development, land development and proper education, and the problem of hunger, by food production across the world. Let us take the initiative first to win wealth by cooperation with other rulers, and ultimately win our goals by our own power and effort. 
5477 :May Brhaspati, omniscient lord of divine voice, protect us from sins and negative legacies of the past, from doubts and fears from above and below. May Indra, mighty ruler, be our friend and protect us from difficulties facing upfront. May he promote us on and on. May he place us at the centre of life’s problems, protect and promote us and create the wealth of honour and excellence for us, his friends.il. May Brhaspati, omniscient lord of divine voice, protect us from sins and negative legacies of the past, from doubts and fears from above and below. May Indra, mighty ruler, be our friend and protect us from difficulties facing upfront. May he promote us on and on. May he place us at the centre of life’s problems, protect and promote us and create the wealth of honour and excellence for us, his friends. 
5478 :Breaking the clouds and shattering mountains, first self-manifested among things born, the very embodiment of universal law and the truth of existence, Brhaspati, lord creator, ruler, protector and promoter of the expansive universe is the very essence of the life and breath of existence who wields and governs all matters and materials of the world. Lord and master of the earth by virtue of knowledge and power of action, illustrious with the light and fire of life, he is our father generator who, like the mighty thunder, proclaims his power and presence across heaven and earth. 
5479 :Brhaspati, lord ruler of all, is he who, for the people in need, creates and gives a world of beauty and plenty when they approach him in the mood and spirit of supplication and prayer. When people invoke the divine lord, he breaks the thickest clouds of darkness and suffering, shatters the strongholds of exploitation and slavery, and challenges and wins over enemies and adversaries standing up in arms against humanity. 
5480 :This divine and illustrious lord of the universe, Brhaspati, overcomes the enemies, wins wealth and happiness, and reveals mighty treasures of lands and light of knowledge. Ruling over the dynamics of waters, energies and the karmic flow of nature’s law and light of heaven and bliss of life, himself unseen and undefeated, Brhaspati destroys all unfriendly forces confronting humanity by the strikes of his thunderbolt of justice and punishment by law. 
5481 :Our father creator, omniscient lord divine, revealed for us this universal voice of knowledge spontaneously. Structured in seven metres, it is born of the lord’s awareness of Satyam and Rtam, i.e., the eternal and mutable truth of existence and its laws of evolution, sustenance and involution. He, the original source of the birth of the universe and its knowledge and language, also revealed the fourth and silent mode of existence in the transcendent state of Moksha beyond the earlier three of Dharma, Artha and Kama without effort and spoke it for Indra, the soul. Our father creator, omniscient lord divine, revealed for us this universal voice of knowledge spontaneously. Structured in seven metres, it is born of the lord’s awareness of Satyam and Rtam, i.e., the eternal and mutable truth of existence and its laws of evolution, sustenance and involution. He, the original source of the birth of the universe and its knowledge and language, also revealed the fourth and silent mode of existence in the transcendent state of Moksha beyond the earlier three of Dharma, Artha and Kama without effort and spoke it for Indra, the soul. 
5482 :Speaking the Word of eternal knowledge, meditating on the natural, eternal spirit of omniscience, the Rshis, children of light, brave offsprings of divine virility, self-disciplined souls established in the position of vibrant sages among humanity, realise in direct experience the first and original presence of the adorable lord Supreme. Speaking the Word of eternal knowledge, meditating on the natural, eternal spirit of omniscience, the Rshis, children of light, brave offsprings of divine virility, self-disciplined souls established in the position of vibrant sages among humanity, realise in direct experience the first and original presence of the adorable lord Supreme. 
5483 :Chanting with friends as with hansa-like simple sinless souls of purity, breaking the adamantine chains of karmic bondage, loudly proclaiming the divine Word of omniscience, Brhaspati, master celebrant of the Infinite Spirit, blest with knowledge and vision divine, sings and adores the lord divine. Chanting with friends as with hansa-like simple sinless souls of purity, breaking the adamantine chains of karmic bondage, loudly proclaiming the divine Word of omniscience, Brhaspati, master celebrant of the Infinite Spirit, blest with knowledge and vision divine, sings and adores the lord divine. 
5484 :Brhaspati, master of language, wishing for the light of knowledge and expression in the midst of the darkness of the web of the world of mutability, expresses the two upper levels of language, i.e., madhyama and vaikhari, which he expresses by two media of thought and word, and the one hidden below, i.e., Pashyanti, he apprehends through one, the deeper mind in meditation. Thus he reveals the three modes of language. (The fourth is Para, the silent mode of language in its originality beyond the world of mutability which can be realised in the highest state of Samadhi.) Brhaspati, master of language, wishing for the light of knowledge and expression in the midst of the darkness of the web of the world of mutability, expresses the two upper levels of language, i.e., madhyama and vaikhari, which he expresses by two media of thought and word, and the one hidden below, i.e., Pashyanti, he apprehends through one, the deeper mind in meditation. Thus he reveals the three modes of language. (The fourth is Para, the silent mode of language in its originality beyond the world of mutability which can be realised in the highest state of Samadhi.) Brhaspati, the seeker of light, in the state of turiya beyond deep sleep, breaks through the three bonds of the city of darkness of the mutable world like thunder and lightning breaking the dark cloud and directly realises the dawn, the sun rays, the sun and the light beyond the sun. Brhaspati, the seeker of light, in the state of turiya beyond deep sleep, breaks through the three bonds of the city of darkness of the mutable world like thunder and lightning breaking the dark cloud and directly realises the dawn, the sun rays, the sun and the light beyond the sun. 
5485 :Indra, mighty ruling soul, wishing to taste the sweetness of milk mixed with soma, i.e., divine ecstasy with vibrations of grace, removes the veil of darkness covering the light of knowledge and divine speech with an act of will as if with a stroke of thunder and lightning, throws the demon away lamenting, recovers and enjoys the light of knowledge with the voice of divinity and showers of bliss in a state of clairvoyance. Indra, mighty ruling soul, wishing to taste the sweetness of milk mixed with soma, i.e., divine ecstasy with vibrations of grace, removes the veil of darkness covering the light of knowledge and divine speech with an act of will as if with a stroke of thunder and lightning, throws the demon away lamenting, recovers and enjoys the light of knowledge with the voice of divinity and showers of bliss in a state of clairvoyance. 
5486 :Brahmanaspati, master, protector, promoter and ruler of the world of existence, blest with divine light, vision and speech breaks down the thief of cows, i.e., hoarders, exploiters and destroyers of the wealth of life. He breaks them down with the help and cooperation of friends and associates who are generous, self-fulfilled, fervently dedicated to truth, purity of conduct, laws of Dharma and rectitude, and blest with ample means and materials for the achievement of their goal. Thus does he recover and establish wealth and common wealth for the individual and the society. Brahmanaspati, master, protector, promoter and ruler of the world of existence, blest with divine light, vision and speech breaks down the thief of cows, i.e., hoarders, exploiters and destroyers of the wealth of life. He breaks them down with the help and cooperation of friends and associates who are generous, self-fulfilled, fervently dedicated to truth, purity of conduct, laws of Dharma and rectitude, and blest with ample means and materials for the achievement of their goal. Thus does he recover and establish wealth and common wealth for the individual and the society. 
5487 :They, friends and associates, with dedication to truth and with honest mind, intentions, thoughts and actions, wishing to promote the cows, i.e., the wealth and culture of the nation as a system, approach the ‘gopati’, i.e., the head of the commonwealth, and he, Brhaspati, master, protector and ruler of the expansive system, together with his associates at his full command, with safeguards against negativity, scandal and calamity, creates and organises a nation of freedom and progress ranging over the earth in peace and joy. They, friends and associates, with dedication to truth and with honest mind, intentions, thoughts and actions, wishing to promote the cows, i.e., the wealth and culture of the nation as a system, approach the ‘gopati’, i.e., the head of the commonwealth, and he, Brhaspati, master, protector and ruler of the expansive system, together with his associates at his full command, with safeguards against negativity, scandal and calamity, creates and organises a nation of freedom and progress ranging over the earth in peace and joy. 
5488 :Exalting him with our thoughts and actions dedicated to peace, freedom and all round well being of life, supporting him, waxing and roaring victorious as a lion, in the world’s hall of yajnic freedom and progress, let us join Brhaspati, mighty and generous protector, for the sake of victory in every battle worthy of the brave, and win our goals and enjoy life with him. Exalting him with our thoughts and actions dedicated to peace, freedom and all round well being of life, supporting him waxing and roaring victorious as a lion in the world’s hall of yajnic freedom and progress, let us join Brhaspati, mighty and generous protector, for the sake of victory in every battle worthy of the brave, and win our goals and enjoy life with him. 
5489 :When Brhaspati achieves food, energy and victories and higher possibilities of universal order and, like the sun, reaches and illuminates the heavens with light, then those who receive and shine with light like the planets, being many and various, exalt the mighty generous master ruler with words of adoration. 10. When Brhaspati achieves food, energy and victories and higher possibilities of universal order and, like the sun, reaches and illuminates the heavens with light, then those who receive and shine with light like the planets, being many and various, exalt the mighty generous master ruler with words of adoration. 
5490 :O Brhaspati, O leading lights of humanity, for food and energy, good health and age, fulfil the hopes and ambitions of the people and justify your words of purpose to the point of truth without compromise. Protect the cooperator and celebrant with your own power and security. Then let all violence, enmity and sabotage be overcome and cast off totally far away. And may the heaven and earth, givers of universal fulfillment, listen to our prayer and adoration. O Brhaspati, O leading lights of humanity, for food and energy, good health and age, fulfil the hopes and ambitions of the people and justify your words of purpose to the point of truth without compromise. Protect the cooperator and celebrant with your own power and security. Then let all violence, enmity and sabotage be overcome and cast off totally far away. And may the heaven and earth, givers of universal fulfilment listen to our prayer and adoration. 
5491 :Indra with his might breaks the top of the great ocean of waters in space and, breaking the dark cloud, releases the seven seas and sets the rivers allow. May the heaven and earth protect us by the divinities. Indra with his might breaks the top of the great ocean of waters in space and, breaking the dark cloud, releases the seven seas and sets the rivers aflow. May the heaven and earth protect us by the divinities. 
5492 :(The metaphor has been explained also as revelation of the Vedas in seven metres at the time of the creation of humanity. The revelation breaks through the darkness of ignorance and releases the light of knowledge to radiate in seven chhandas of the Vedas.) (The metaphor has been explained also as revelation of the Vedas in seven metres at the time of the creation of humanity. The revelation breaks through the darkness of ignorance and releases the light of knowledge to radiate in seven chhandas of the Vedas.) To the best of your knowledge and culture and with the best of your language, worship and adore Indra, protector of stars and planets, lands and cows, language and culture, creator of the dynamics of existence and protector of its constancy. 
5493 :Let the vibrations of divinity, like crimson rays of dawn which bring the sun to the earth, bring Indra on to our sacred grass where we humans meet and pray and celebrate the lord in song together. 
5494 :Lands and cows, suns and planets, indeed all objects in motion, exude for Indra, wielder of thunder, the ichor of emotional adoration seasoned with ecstasy like honey sweet milk mixed with soma which he receives close at hand and cherishes. 
5495 :Up let us rise on top of the sun and vast spaces, reach the abode of Indra, and, having drunk the soma sweet of ecstasy, let us be together across and over the thrice seven stages of being in evolution in the purely spiritual state of the lord’s presence as a friend. 
5496 :(The thrice seven are the steps of physical, mental and pychic evolutionary phases of existence in three qualitative modes of being in the process of becoming. The seven states of evolution in descending order from pure being are: mahat, Ahankara and the five elements, akasha, vayu, agni, apah and prthivi. The three qualitative modes are sattva, rajas and tamas or thought, energy and matter. Another way to explain the twenty one is: five elements, five pranic energies, five perceptive organs and five organs of volition, the twenty-first is antahkarana or psychic self. When the psychic self or the soul in the existential state wishes to rise back to the purely spiritual state, it has to cross the twenty one stages and then be in the company of Indra, the cosmic self, and even later, in the transcendental state of absolute Being, the Spirit, the Brahmic state. This is set out in detail in the Sankhya, Yoga and Vedanta philosophy.) O lovers of Yajna, lovers of union and communion with the divine, adore and worship Indra, adore and worship again, worship again and again. Worship along with your children and grand children, just as the citizens adore and exalt a great city and the glorious ruler of the celestial city. 
5497 :The drum booms aloud, the bow string (of Pranava) strikes the arm guard, the string bells jingle, let the hymns rise in honour of Indra. 
5498 :When the dynamic senses of perception and volition, controlled, unagitating and calmly withdrawn, concentrate in the inner mind, then you receive the showers of soma nectar of spiritual ananda for Indra, the soul. 
5499 :Indra, the soul, seeking honour, fame and power, loves the soma of ananda. Agni, leading scholar advancing into the light of knowledge, loves the soma of ananda. All brilliancies of nature and humanity love the ecstasy of soma. Varuna, powers of love and justice, all abide in the ecstasy of soma. All seekers of yajnic action and divine dedication love the soma of spiritual ananda of their creation like the mother loving her child. 
5500 :Varuna, master scholar and teacher, you are divinely brilliant and generous whose seven streams of knowledge and wisdom flow forth in words from the master’s voice to the seekers, like water flowing from a stream into many channels. 
5501 :That soul is Indra, man of self control and self power, who withdraws his scattered powers of senses and mind, turns them inward and engages them into meditation for the sake of generosity of the spirit, and then as their patient master and leader, with the power and grace of his self-possession, releases and relaxes them in the state of peace. He is the sovereign soul. 
5502 :Indra, the sovereign soul of self-power, transcends all jealousy, malignity and enmity and, blest with top handsomeness and grace of the spirit, breaks open into words the mature knowledge and self-realised spiritual food for the seekers. 
5503 :Neither a child nor an adolescent, the man of mature mind abiding in a healthy body practices meditation and realises the great, supreme, omnipotent cosmic soul of universal holy action for the enlightenment of all about Mother Nature and the father of creation. 
5504 :O lord of golden grace, father and sustainer of the house-hold of the universe, come and seat yourself in the golden chariot of this human body and, together as friends and companions, we shall ride this chariot of heavenly light, thousand wheeled, invincible and immaculate, moving on the road to peace and ultimate good. 
5505 :Thus do yajnic and meditative souls holding havis for homage adore and worship self-refulgent Indra when, in order to realise the nature, character and generosity, indeed the very presence of the lord, they turn their self-controlled mind to the Divine Soul in order to reach him. 
5506 :Of these devotees of yajna and lovers of meditative communion, those who sit on the holy grass with a clean mind and offer oblations of spiritual love in the style of the sages of old as ever achieve union with the universal presence of the eternal Spirit. 
5507 :I adore Indra, lord supreme, who rules the people, and who is the irresistible and universal mover by waves of cosmic energy, saviour of all humanity, supreme warrior and winner of cosmic battles of the elemental forces and who destroys the evil, darkness and poverty of the world. 
5508 :O man of universal devotion, exalt and glorify that omnipotent Indra for protection and progress in whom, as ruler and controller of the world, both justice and mercy abide simultaneously, who holds the thunderbolt of power in hand, and who is great and glorious like the sun in heaven. 
5509 :No one can equal merely by action, much less hurt even by yajnas, that person who has won the favour and grace of Indra, lord divine who is rising as well as raising his devotees high, who is universally adored, universal genius, redoubtable and invincibly illustrious. 
5510 :Unchallengeable, awful, victorious in cosmic dynamics, in whose pervasive presence great and tempestuous stars and planets, earths and heavens, all in unison move in order and do homage in reverence, such is Indra. 
5511 :Indra, lord of thunder, if there were a hundred heavens, and if there were a hundred earths, they would not be able to rival you. Not a thousand suns, nor heavens, earths and skies together would match you at the rise in manifestation. 
5512 :O lord of the thunderbolt, master and controller of world’s wealth, honour and power, most potent and lord of showers of generosity, with your generous and creative power and grandeur you pervade the universe. Pray protect, guide and promote us by your various and wondrous modes of protection and progress in our search for development of lands and cows, knowledge, language and culture. 
5513 :and inspirer of clouds, mountains and great men of generosity, may our hymns of adoration win your pleasure. Pray create and provide means and methods of sustenance and progress in life, and cast off jealousies and enmities against divinity, knowledge and prayer, our bond between human and divine. 
5514 :Keep off, down under foot the haves who hoard and share not. You are great, simply great, the only one. There is none equal, alike or more. 
5515 :You rule over the creative and cooperative men of positive action. You rule over the uncreative and destructive men of negative action as well. Indra, you are the ruler, the ultimate ordainer of good and evil both. 
5516 :Active, expressive and eloquent people, conscious of their rights and duties, serve and abide by the ruling power of the system, Indra, as it arises and advances, and while they do so they enjoy good health, honour and prosperity of life for themselves and their progeny. 
5517 :Ruling power, Indra, you have risen high by virtue of your strength, patient courage, and grandeur of personality. Generous as showers of blissful rain, you are mighty, excellent and refulgent as the sun. 
5518 :You, Indra, are destroyer of evil and demonic darkness of the system, breaker of the clouds for rain, you cross the skies and, like the sun sustaining the regions of light by its self-refulgence, you sustain the rule of light and law by your own charismatic grandeur of character and personality. 
5519 :refulgence of personal dignity and social brilliance, keeping the force of your arms and blaze of justice and rectitude fresh and shining by the constant manifestation of your dynamic vigour of personality. 
5520 :You, Indra, are the supreme ruler over all things come into existence by your self-refulgence which indeed is the light and life of all the worlds. O ruler, you too be that all over the world. 
5521 :May Indra, lord ruler of his world of reality, come, arise in view, in our consciousness, for the joy of his devotees. Mighty is he, loving, bright and accepting by his own essential nature and the laws of life, and, by his boundless grandeur and generosity, he takes on all challenges of counterforces and reduces them to naught for his people. (The mantra may be applied to Divinity or to the ruling power). May Indra, lord ruler of his world of reality, come, arise in view, in our consciousness, for the joy of his devotees. Mighty is he, loving, bright and accepting by his own essential nature and the laws of life, and, by his boundless grandeur and generosity, he takes on all challenges of counterforces and reduces them to naught for his people. (The mantra may be applied to Divinity or to the ruling power). 
5522 :Stable, strong and perfectly directed is your chariot, controlled and accurate your dual powers of motion. O refulgent ruler and protector of the people, in your hands you hold the controls of the thunder power of force and justice. Pray come at the fastest by the safest and straightest path to us right here. We celebrate and exalt your powers and generosity, and you love to protect and promote your celebrants. Stable, strong and perfectly directed is your chariot, controlled and accurate your dual powers of motion. O refulgent ruler and protector of the people, in your hands you hold the controls of the thunder power of force and justice. Pray come at the fastest by the safest and straighest path to us right here. We celebrate and exalt your powers and generosity, and you love to protect and promote your celebrants. 
5523 :May the mighty, blazing, penetrating, vigorous and refining radiations of this Indra, protector and promoter of humanity, thunder armed, virile and generous, indomitable upholder of truth, come in unison with inspiring strength and bring him to us for our social and spiritual good. May the mighty, blazing, penetrating, vigorous and refining radiations of this Indra, protector and promoter of humanity, thunder armed, virile and generous, indomitable upholder of truth, come in unison with inspiring strength and bring him to us for our social and spiritual good. 
5524 :Thus do solar radiations transmit the presence of Indra, lord protector and ruler pervasive in the world of humanity, all aware, the pillar of universal energy, strength and power. Thus do we exalt and celebrate Indra. O lord, you are the shower of power and generosity in the all-sustaining world of yours. Pray create and give us the strength of life, hold us in your power and presence for our promotion and progress since you are the ultimate lord and master of the dedicated aspirants for light. Thus do solar radiations transmit the presence of Indra, lord protector and ruler pervasive in the world of humanity, all aware, the pillar of universal energy, strength and power. Thus do we exalt and celebrate Indra. O lord, you are the shower of power and generosity in the all-sustaining world of yours. Pray create and give us the strength of life, hold us in your power and presence for our promotion and progress since you are the ultimate lord and master of the dedicated aspirants for light. 
5525 :Indra, may wealths, peace and honours of the world come to us, I wish and pray. Come, accept the homage of the celebrant’s song of praise. You rule all, come and abide in this holy seat of yajna and love of the heart. Bold and undaunted, we are your celebrants by the nature and Dharma of our being. Indra, may wealths, peace and honours of the world come to us, I wish and pray. Come, accept the homage of the celebrant’s song of praise. You rule all, come and abide in this holy seat of yajna and love of the heart. Bold and undaunted, we are your celebrants by the nature and Dharma of our being. 
5526 :People of the first order dedicated to divinity and yajnic piety go forward by holy paths of the first order and perform admirable acts of the most difficult kind. But those who cannot board the ark of yajnic order and divine love, men of unclean character, doubtful mind and crooked ways, lie about here in the lower and lowest orders of being. People of the first order dedicated to divinity and yajnic piety go forward by holy paths of the first order and perform admirable acts of the most difficult order. But those who cannot board the ark of yajnic order and divine love, men of unclean character, doubtful mind and crooked ways, lie about here in the lower and lowest orders of being. 
5527 :Thus do people of evil disposition keep wallowing piteously in low states of existence whose mind and senses are engaged in wrong things like restive horses. And thus do others of the first and higher disposition fare admirably who are dedicated here itself to the higher omnificent divinity in which infinite gifts of freedom, peace and happiness abound. Thus do people of evil disposition keep wallowing in low states of existence whose mind and senses are engaged in wrong things like restive horses. And thus do others of the first and higher disposition fare who are dedicated here itself to the higher omnificent divinity in which infinite gifts of freedom, peace and happiness abound. 
5528 :He wields the dynamics of nature, fixes the mountains and moves the roaring clouds. He holds the raging heavens and shakes the violent skies. He holds both earth and heaven together and, the glorious sun having drunk up the vapours, showers down the rains in joy like the overflow of divine ecstasy in the music of song. He wields the dynamics of nature, fixes the mountains and moves the roaring clouds. He holds the raging heavens and shakes the violent skies. He holds both earth and heaven together and, the glorious sun having drunk up the vapours, showers down the rains in joy like the overflow of divine ecstasy in the music of song. 
5529 :I happily abide by this law and discipline of yours, Indra, which is divinely maintained and sustained, the law by which, O lord of power and glory, you punish those who strike life by their hoof and claw. May your presence abide in this holy seat of my yajna in the heart and soul. May your divine majesty, O lord of glory, know and fulfil our desire in this cherished act of love and faith. I happily abide by this law and discipline of yours, Indra, which is divinely maintained and sustained, the law by which, O lord of power and glory, you punish those who strike life by their hoof and claw. May your presence abide in this holy seat of my yajna in the heart and soul. May your divine majesty, O lord of glory, know and fulfil our desire in this cherished act of love and faith. 
5530 :O lord universally invoked and celebrated, let us overcome the difficult problems of the want of moral and spiritual vision and knowledge by the Vedic voice, and the problem of world hunger by cooperative production of food. And let us on top win wealth, honour and excellence by our own brilliance of intelligence and our own persistent effort. O lord universally invoked and celebrated, let us overcome the difficult problems of want, of moral and spiritual vision and knowledge, by the Vedic voice, and the problem of world hunger by cooperative production of food. And let us on top win wealth, honour and excellence by our own brilliance of intelligence and our own persistent effort. 
5531 :May Brhaspati protect and promote us all round from behind, from above and from below against sin and evil. May Indra, our friend and ruler, create and give wealth, honour and excellence for us and for the entire fraternity of the world from within at the centre of humanity and may he continue the same into the future. May Brhaspati protect and promote us all round from behind, from above and from below against sin and evil. May Indra, our friend and ruler, create and give wealth, honour and excellence for us and for the entire fraternity of the world from within at the centre of humanity and may he continue the same into the future. 
5532 :The great and powerful sun drinks up the soma, essence of vital juices reinforced with herbal elixir, matured in three containers, i.e., the earth, the sky and the heaven of light, and distilled by light and wind while it shines and energises the essences. 
5533 :He who delights in energising this sun, greatest of the great in nature, to do great things, who blesses and continues to bless this blazing power of light is the eternal, ever true, self-refulgent Lord Supreme, blissful as the moon. 
5534 :And he who would love to do great things vast and worthy of the great, he, true and bright as the moon, should serve and meditate on this lord of unbounded light and energy. 
5535 :Offer a song of abundant praise in honour of this ruling lord Indra for his mighty force and front rank chariot. He, destroyer of darkness and evil, inspires us in our battles of life at the closest and enlightens us in our struggle for universal freedom. Let the strings of the alien enemy bows be snapped by the strike of the forces of Indra. 
5536 :Indra, you release the floods of rivers to flow down on the earth. You destroy the demon of darkness, evil, want and ignorance. You are born without an equal, adversary and enemy, and you promote the choicest wealth and excellence of the world. Such as you are we love and embrace you as our closest loving friend and companion. Let the alien strings of the enemy bows snap upon their bows. 
5537 :Indra, may the facts and forces of enmity, adversity and ungenerosity be eliminated from life and the world. May all our thoughts and actions be inspired by love and generosity. You strike the thunderbolt of justice and punishment upon the enemy who wants to destroy us or frustrate our love and generosity. May your grace and generosity bring us wealth, honour and excellence of life. Let the strings of enemy bows snap by the tension of their own negativities. 
5538 :O ruler of the world, Indra, take on, protect and promote this vibrant youthful social order, release all the versatile and abundant resources of development here for this purpose, let no other programme or programmers distract your attention. For you and your purpose all these natural and human resources are ready, trained and matured to the full. 
5539 :are ripe and ready and those that are being prepared. Voices of sincere devotion call on you. Indra, knowing well, loving and fully dedicated to this world programme of development, take it on here and now, protect, promote and raise the world to the heights of attainment. 
5540 :Whoever is loyal and dedicated with enthusiastic mind and total devotion of heart and soul, and creates and matures the soma of universal value for Indra and the social order, the lord never ignores his words of prayer, never alienates his property and possessions, in fact he recognises his services with honour and makes him feel proud and blest. 
5541 :The lord keeps in close and direct vicinity the person who, like a generous prosperous man, creates and offers the soma of sincere dedication to him. He, lord of all power and glory, protects him in full security without the shackles, and even without prayer, destroys the enemies of positivity and divinity in the social order. 
5542 :Enthusiastic and advancing for progress, prosperity and pride of achievement, we call upon you, Indra, ruling lord of the world, to come close to us and be with us. Winning the graces of life and doing glory to divinity, we pray, let us abide in your favour and adorable good will. We pray for peace and well being, we ask for divine grace. 
5543 :I cure you and release you from the consumptive killer disease even of the highest severity and immunize you against such disease, known or unknown, with the administration of medicine and tonics by homa so that you may live a full and happy life. And if stroke, atrophy or paralysis has seized this patient, then let Indra, penetrative beams of nature’s energy, and Agni, vital heat of life in the body, light of the sun and magnetic force of the earth cure and release the patient. 
5544 :If the patient is extremely debilitated, sunk beyond hope, almost gone to the brink of death, I touch and bring him back from the depth of despair to live his full hundred years of life. (The word ‘asparsham’ suggests the efficacy of touch therapy.) With medicines, herbs and tonics of a thousandfold efficacy of light power, a hundred year’s vitality capable of sustaining a hundred year span of life, I have brought this patient back to life and health just as Indra, lord of life and his physician version, the doctor, takes this patient across all evils and maladies of the world to a full life of hundred years. 
5545 :O patient, live a hundred years through autumn, winter and spring seasons, rising, growing and advancing. May Indra, lord of strength, power and glory, Agni, lord of light and fire in the fore front, Savita, lord of life’s generation and sustenance, and Brhaspati, lord of space and radiant knowledge, bless you with hundredfold joy and vest you with hundredfold span of life again with herbs and medications of high order for good health. 
5546 :I have delivered you from death and disease, brought you back to life. Live life again, renewed, refreshed again, healthy over all in all limbs, organs and systems function. I have brought back your vision and understanding in full, your life and age in full. 
5547 :May Agni, ‘chitraka’, with Brahma, ‘udumbara’, combined according to the formula in medical literature, destroy the infection and viral pain that has entered, infects and afflicts your foetus, ovary and uterus in the reproductive system. 
5548 :The acute infection that has entered your womb in the reproductive system and consumes your foetus, let Agni, ‘chitraka’, in combination with Brahma, ‘udumbara’, according to the specific formula, destroy and eliminate. 
5549 :Whatever afflicts the insemination and fertilisation process or the moving foetus or whatever hurts and damages your new born baby, we destroy from here. 
5550 :Whatever disturbs your thighs, interferes with the conjugal relation of the wife and husband, disturbs the couple in sleep or destroys the seed and the embryo in the womb, we destroy and eliminate from here. 
5551 :Whatever evil and afflication comes as brother, i.e., genetically, or as husband, i.e., through conjugal relationship, or otherwise through love and passion, and hurts, damages or destroys your progeny, we destroy and eliminate from here. 
5552 :Whoever or whatever approaches you either by creating dreams of reality or in the state of sleep or under veil of darkness or by hypnosis, and hurts or destroys your progeny, that we eliminate from here. 
5553 :I remove and uproot the worst cancer and consumption from your eyes, nostrils, ears, chin, brain and tongue related to the head area. 
5554 :disease related to the arms, from your neck arteries and veins, nape, collar and chest bones, spine, shoulders and arms. 
5555 :I remove and uproot the consumptive, cancerous disease from your heart, lungs, gall bladder, sides, kidneys, spleen and liver. 
5556 :I remove and uproot the consumptive, cancerous disease from your intestines, anal area, colon, stomach, flanks, lower abdomen and navel area. 
5557 :I remove and uproot the consumptive, cancerous disease from your thighs, knees, heels, fore-feet and toes, hips, lower back and genitalia. 
5558 :I remove and uproot the consumptive, cancerous disease from your bones, marrow, tendons, veins, hands, fingers and nails. 
5559 :The consumptive cancerous disease which has spread all over your skin and body in every part, every pore and hair, and every joint, we remove and uproot with the diagnosis and judicious treatment by the kashyapa, enlightened physician. 
5560 :Off with you, hypnosis of the mind, disturb not, get away and wander far around with death and adversity, and there proclaim that I am not for you, I am alive, awake and alert, my mind is wakeful and versatile. 
5561 :Here today as before we have regaled this lord of the thunderbolt. For him, again, now, all of one mind, bear and bring the distilled soma of homage, and worship him who would, for certain, for joy of the song, grace the celebrants. 
5562 :The wolf, its counterforce elephant, and the thief all have to accept and follow the laws of this lord Indra. May he, loving and cherishing this our song of adoration, listen and come with gifts of clear and un- illusive intelligence and understanding. 
5563 :achievement of Indra’s valour? By which person hasn’t his glory been perceived through his wonder deeds? He is the destroyer of evil and darkness by his very nature. 
5564 :Indra, lord of power and advancement, you alone we invoke and call upon for acquisition of food, energy, honour, excellence and progress. All of us, leading people, makers, poets, artists, artisans and architects of the nation, fast advancing in all directions, invoke and exhort you, protector and promoter of universal truth and values in human struggles for light, goodness and generosity, and the wealth of life. 
5565 :Indra, lord of wondrous powers and performance, wielding the thunderbolt of justice and punishment in hand, great and glorious, breaker of the clouds and shaker of mountains, invoked and adored in song, with truth and science, power and force, collect, organise and win for us the wealth of lands, cows and rays of the sun, horses, transports and chariots like the victories of wealth and glory for the ambitious nation. 
5566 :Indra, men in general, learned experts of vision and wisdom, illustrious powers of law and order, and fighting warriors of defence and protection all together, raising a united voice of praise, prayer and appreciation, with songs of holiness and acts of piety, invoke and invite you, ancient, nearest and most excellent lord of power and lustre, to inaugurate their yajnic celebration of the soma session of peaceful and exciting programme of development. 
5567 :In the ecstasy of this soma success of achievement through the yajnic programme, Indra augments the strength and enthusiasm of this host and master of the programme, while now as ever before, the people appropriately adore and exalt the greatness of this lord. 
5568 :And O lord lover of song and celebration, Indra, we send up vaulting voices of adoration and prayer to you like wave on waves of the flood rolling upon the sea. 
5569 :O lord of clouds and oceans of space, munificent and brave, expansive, boundless, infinite, like streams of water augmenting the sea, our songs of adoration exalt you wave on wave of flood day by day, the knowledge about you is unending. 
5570 :controlled by word, carry Indra, the soul, in the wide yoked spacious body-chariot by the power of the adorations of the universal mover, Indra, cosmic energy. 
5571 :We choose Agni, the fire, as prime power of social yajna, which carries the fragrance of yajna universally across the earth, the sky and even to the heavens, and which is the chief creator of prosperity and maker of beautiful forms. 
5572 :We choose Agni visible and invisible, and invoke it with faith and holy action, Agni which is the protector of the people, carrier of yajnic fragrance, and favourite of the wise. 
5573 :us here the brilliant divine gifts of yajna for the pure at heart. You alone are the chief priest and performer of the yajna of creation. You alone are adorable. 
5574 :Agni, worthy of worship, worthy of reverence and salutations, virile and generous, is beautiful, it conquers the darkness of the world and is lighted and raised in yajnas. 
5575 :Virile and generous, Agni is lighted and raised, it shines and blazes. It is the carrier of fragrance to the divinities of heaven and earth. Devotees bearing sacred offerings worship it in yajna. 
5576 :Agni, virile and generous as showers of rain, refulgent lord of light and yajna, we, overflowing at heart with faith and generosity, light the fire of yajna, rising and shining across the vast spaces. 
5577 :Pray to Agni of bright flames with songs and praise for protection and progress. O generous scholar, study and serve Agni for wealth, famous among people, Agni who provides home and happiness for the man of brilliance. 
5578 :Agni, universal fire of life, come with other fires such as the sun. We opt to worship you alone, the cosmic yajamana. The yajaka people holding ladlefuls of havi would honour and celebrate you and seat you on the holy grass. 
5579 :Agni, creator of energy and power, dear as breath of life omnipresent, the ladles of ghrta feed you well in the holy fire of yajna. We honour and adore the divine fire, prime power, infallible product of cosmic energy and rising in flames in yajnas. 
5580 :O lord of universal wealth, O shelter home of the world, may these words of my divine adoration please you and exalt you. The saints and sages of vision and wisdom and fiery heat and purity of light adore you with songs of celebration. 
5581 :This Indra, adored and exalted by poets and sages a thousand ways to power and glory, rises like the sea. Ever true and inviolable is he, and I celebrate his might and grandeur expanding in the yajnic programmes of the dominion of the wise. 
5582 :Indra, lord of universal energy, world power and human forces, is worthy of reverence and invocation in all our joint battles of life. May the lord of strongest bow, destroyer of evil and dispeller of darkness and ignorance, great and glorious as sung in the Rks, grace our songs of adoration and faithful efforts with the beauty and glory of success. 
5583 :You are the original giver of means of effort and success in all fields of life. You are the maker of leaders and giver of the wealth and honours of life. Of such great lord of glory and power, promoter and protector of strength and power, we pray for wealth, honour and excellence worthy of your glory. 
5584 :Indra, O inspired soul, in the external conflicts of life and in the internal conflicts of mind, you are the superior over all assailants. You are the destroyer of evil and calumny, creator of goodness and eliminator of impediments. Pray drive off all evil thoughts and oppositions of life and mind. 
5585 :Just as mothers follow the desires and interests of children, so do the heaven and earth, all living beings from earth to heaven, think and act in conformity with you, evil destroying power. All oppositions slacken and fall exhausted when you strike and destroy the demons of evil and negativity in the interest of humanity. 
5586 :O men and women of the earth, for your protection and progress follow Indra, unaging, all inspirer and mover, himself unmoved and self-inspired, most dynamic, highest victor, thunderer, master of the chariot of life, inviolable augmenter of strength to I adore Indra, lord supreme, who rules the people, and who is the irresistible and universal mover by waves of cosmic energy, saviour of all humanity, supreme warrior and winner of cosmic battles of the elemental forces and who destroys the evil, darkness and poverty of the world. 
5587 :O man of universal devotion, exalt and glorify that omnipotent Indra for protection and progress in whom, as ruler and controller of the world, both justice and mercy abide simultaneously, who holds the thunderbolt of power in hand, and who is great and glorious like the sun in heaven. 
5588 :That grandeur and majesty of yours, that power and potential, that continuous act of divine generosity, that adamantine will and force of natural justice and dispensation of the thunderbolt which overwhelms our will and choice commands our sense of discrimination, and we glorify it, we sharpen it, we accept it with adoration. 
5589 :The light of heaven glorifies your blazing power, the earth augments your honour and fame, and the rolling floods of water and mighty mountains of majesty do awesome homage to you. 
5590 :Vishnu, cosmic dynamics of nature’s expansive sustenance, Mitra, loving and life giving sun, Varuna, soothing and energising oceans of the universe, and the power and force of the showers of cosmic energy all exalt you and receive their life and exaltation from you. 
5591 :The people, in fact the entire humanity, bow in homage and surrender to this lord of passion, power and splendour just as rivers flow on down and join into the sea. 
5592 :When Indra, Lord Almighty, pervades and envelops both heaven and earth in the cover of light, the light that shines is only the lord’s divine splendour that blazes with glory. 
5593 :And when the lord of might and munificence with his thunderbolt of a hundred potentials shatters the head of Vrtra, terror striking demon of darkness, drought and despair, the bolt is nothing but the blazing That Indra, Brahma, is the first and highest among all the worlds in existence, of which, as the original cause, is born the blazing, refulgent potent sun which, always rising every moment, destroys the negativities which damage life and by which all positive and protective powers and people of the world rejoice and celebrate life. 
5594 :Growing mighty in strength, immensely lustrous, destroyer of negativities, Indra strikes fear into the heart of forces which cause damage to life and the environment. Bountiful purifier and sustainer of the breathing and non-breathing world, all the people and powers which receive sustenance from you join to do honour to you in their joy and celebration of life. 
5595 :And they all, celebrants of divinity, surrender all actions and prayers to you when they join in couples and grow to three in the family. O lord sweeter than sweetness itself, join the sweets of life with honey and with divine sweetness and bliss create life overflowing with love and ecstasy. 
5596 :Thus with joy on every happy occasion of life, grateful people and vibrant sages celebrate you, winner, creator and giver of wealth and excellence. Illustrious lord of shattering power, expand the commonwealth of permanent values. Let not the crooked and fiendish forces on the prowl suppress the creative gifts of divine generosity. 
5597 :With your divine inspiration, well knowing the weapons of war, we fight out the enemies of life in the battles of humanity. I strengthen and calibrate the arms and ammunitions for battle by your divine words, and by the same divine formula, I sharpen the target efficacy of the arrows and missiles of defence and offence. 
5598 :You sustain this visible world of physical reality and the other invisible world of meta-physical and spiritual reality in which you maintain and protect everything with your might in their very home. And you hold and stabilise the revolving motherly earth and heaven, inspire many great actions therein and see them accomplished. 
5599 :O dedicated celebrant of generous heart, worship and adore the lord of universal presence, self- refulgent, glorious, omniscient wise over all the wise self-realized sages, closer at hand than anything else. That lord of infinite might shines by his own light all round and takes over, symbolically, the image of the vast mother earth, indeed of nature and the expansive universe. 
5600 :The poet of boundless heavenly light speaks these divine verses in honour of Indra for his own spiritual peace and pleasure. First and foremost among eminent poets, self-illuminant, self-refulgent and self- controlled, he masters the mighty treasure of Vedic wisdom and he opens the flood gates of his own vision of universal light and wisdom. 
5601 :Thus does the sage of boundless light and vision of wisdom with settled mind address his song of adoration to Indra only, and the pure immaculate fluent streams of speech like motherly creations inspire the world and exalt humanity with strength and enthusiasm. 
5602 :Wondrous banner of divinities, life giving, self- refulgent, pure, powerful and radiant harbinger of the day, the inspiring sun, rising over quarters of space, has dispelled all darkness and evils of all the world far out with its radiations of light. 
5603 :Lo! there rises the sun, wonderful image of Divinity, the very eye of Mitra, heaven, the soothing cool of Varuna, the waters, and the beauty of the moon. It pervades and fills the heaven and earth and the middle regions of the sky. It is indeed the very soul of the moving and the unmoving world. 
5604 :The sun follows the brilliant and beautiful dawn just like a youthful lover who pursues his beloved. And therein, with reference to that, the leading astronomers of the stars extend their noble vision for the calculation of ages for the good of humanity. 
5605 :Indra, lord of vision and hero of a hundred great actions, bring us abundant and illustrious strength, courage and procreative energy by which we may fight out and win many battles of our life. 
5606 :O lord of infinite action, shelter home of the world and wealth of existence, you are our father, you our mother, and to you, we pray for love and peace, good will and grace. 
5607 :O lord of cosmic energy universally invoked, hero of infinite acts of kindness and creation, giver of sustenance and victory, we pray in silent sincerity of conscience, bring us and bless us with noble strength and vitality of body and mind and creativity of vision The golden and brilliant people and forces of the land drink of the delicious, exciting and universal honey sweets of national pride and prestige, and they joyously celebrate their achievements in the company of generous and valorous Indra for the advancement of the honour and glory of the republic, in obedience to the demands and discipline of the freedom and self- government of the nation. 
5608 :Those forces of Indra, the ruler, close together in contact and unison, of varied forms and colours, brilliant as sunrays and generous and productive as cows, who are dearest favourites of the ruler, create the soma of joy and national dignity. They hurl the missile of the thunderbolt upon the invader as loyal citizens of the land in accordance with the demands and discipline Those forces, noble and intelligent, serve and augment the courage and power of this Indra with food, energy and armaments and, as citizens of the land, as a matter of duty to the freedom and discipline of the republic, they predictably join many dedicated projects and programmes of his in anticipation of success. 
5609 :Let all our voices of admiration flow and intensify the soma for the joy of Indra, and let the poets sing songs of adoration for him and celebrate his achievements. 
5610 :the holy business of living, we invoke Indra, in whom all beauties and graces abide, whom all the seven seers in yajna adore, in whom all five senses, mind and intelligence subside absorbed, and under whom all the seven assemblies of the world unite, meet and act. 
5611 :In three modes of body, mind and soul, the devas, seven senses, the human consciousness and the noble yogis, concentrate on Indra, divine consciousness. In three regions of the universe, noble souls meditate on the universal consciousness of the divine Indra. Thus they perform the yajna of divinity in communion. May all our songs of adoration glorify that supreme consciousness, Indra. 
5612 :Indra, the soma nectar which you infuse in the sun and in the three worlds of experience, i.e., earth, heaven and firmament and which you infuse in the winds and enjoy to the last drop, we pray for. 
5613 :And which, O lord of power, you infuse and energise in the far off sea and in this soma distilled by us and enjoy to the last drop, we pray for. 
5614 :And you, O lord protector of eternal truth, who lead the yajamana maker of soma to progress in his yajna and songs of adoration and enjoy the soma homage to the last drop, we pray for. 
5615 :O sun, dispeller of darkness, whatever the aim and purpose for which you rise today, let that be, O Indra, lord ruler of the world, under your command and control. 
5616 :Indra, O mind, O soul, ever rising as the world expands, protector of truth and reality, if you believe and say in all faith that “I shall not die”, then it shall be true, an inviolable reality. 
5617 :Indra, O dynamic intelligence, protector of the knowledge of truth and reality, whatever somas of knowledge, culture and enlightenment are distilled either far away or close at hand, pray you move there to record and protect them for us. 
5618 :May Indra, lord omnipotent, master of the world’s wealth and power, directly listen to our joint prayer for worldly and spiritual advancement with attentive ear and sympathetic understanding, and may the lord of supreme power come to protect and promote our yajnic programme and prayer and taste the pleasure That self-ruled, self-refulgent, brave and generous human character and programme, that human republic, the heaven and earth vested with divine will and intelligence conceive, create and fashion forth for self-realisation of innate glory. O man, among similars and comparables, you stand the first and highest, and your mind is dedicated to the love of Soma, peace, pleasure and excellence of life. 
5619 :Indra, lord of absolute might by nature, since birth of the universe, indeed for eternity, you are without a rival, need no leader, no friend and no comrade, but in the dynamics of human life you do want that the human should be your companion in and for his struggle for self-evolution and social progress. 
5620 :You do not just care to choose the rich for companionship, if they are swollen with drink and pride and violate the rules of divine discipline. But when you attend to the poor and alter their fortune for the better, you are invoked like father with gratitude which the voice of thunder acknowledges and approves. 
5621 :I have received from my father super intelligence of the universal mind and law, I have realised it too in the soul, and I feel reborn like the refulgent sun. 
5622 :With the realisation of ancient and eternal knowledge I sanctify and adorn my words and voice in song like a wise sage, and by that, Indra, lord of light and power, vests me with strength and excellence. 
5623 :There are men who do not adore you, and there are sages who adore you, (both ways you are acknowledged and adored by praise or protest). O lord thus adored by me and pleased, pray accept my adoration and let us rise. 
5624 :Indra, lord almighty, maker and breaker of clouds and mountains, free from anger and fear we adore you and pray: Give us the grace that we may never be like the lowest of human species with nothing to be proud of, let us never be like the indifferent and the depressed, let us never be reduced to the state of forsaken thickets of dead wood. 
5625 :Indra, omnipotent lord, destroyer of darkness and ignorance, we pray that, gently and at peace without anger or impatience, we always worship and meditate on you and, by virtue of your grandeur and glory, we should celebrate and exalt your honour and rejoice with exciting songs and yajnic sessions. 
5626 :Indra, lord ruler and controller of the dynamic forces of the world, drink this soma of ecstasy which, I am sure, would exhilarate you. The cloud, generative power of nature, has distilled it and showered on you. And just as a horse well controlled by the hands and reins of the driver moves to the right destination, so is this soma generated by the hands of the creator meant to exhort you to take the dominion to its destination. 
5627 :That beauty and joy of the governance of your dominion which is agreeable, inspiring and worthy of support and participation, and by which joy, O controller of the dynamic forces of the people, you break the negative forces of darkness, sin and crime, want and ignorance like the sun breaking dark clouds for showers, may that joy, O sovereign lord of power for settlement and prosperity, give you the real pleasure of creative governance and administration. 
5628 :O lord of honour, power and magnificence, pray know well this voice of mine which the sage well settled at peace offers you in adoration of your glory. And accept, honour and apply these holy words of vision and wisdom in practice in the assembly house of the wise for governance and administration. 
5629 :Sagdhyusu sacipata indra visvabhirutibhih. Bhagam na hi tva yasasam vasuvidamanu sura cardmasi. 
5630 :Indra, lord of omnipotent action and infinitely various victories, with all powers, protections and inspirations, strengthen and energise us for excellent works without delay. As you are the very honour, splendour and treasure-home of the universe, O potent and heroic lord, we live in pursuit of your glory to justify our existence and win our destiny. 
5631 :You are the sole One omnipresent citizen of the universe, creator of all lands, cows, lights and knowledges of the world, maker of the motions, ambitions, advancements and achievements of nature and humanity, fountain head of universal joy, and golden refulgent generous lord supreme. No one can ever impair or obstruct your gifts to humanity. O lord, I pray, bring us whatever we need and ask for. 
5632 :We invoke Indra for our programmes of natural and environmental development. We invite Indra when the yajna of development is inaugurated. Lovers and admirers dedicated to him, we pray for his grace in our struggles of life, and we solicit his favour and guidance for the achievement of wealth, honour and excellence. 
5633 :Indra, by the power and abundance of his omnipotence, expands and pervades heaven and earth. Indra gives the radiance of light to the sun. All regions of the universe and her children are sustained in life and order in Indra, and in the infinite power, presence and abundance of Indra flow all liquid energies of life’s evolution to their perfection and fulfilment. 
5634 :Eternal and adorable song of divine praise has been presented. Chant that for Indra, the divine soul. Sing the grand old hymns of divine law and glorify the Lord. Inspire and augment the mind and soul of the celebrant. 
5635 :Dynamic scholars and vibrant sages offer to Indra the song of adoration replete with honey sweets and liquid power of exhortation. Let the beauty and prosperity of life increase among us, let generous and virile strength and vitality grow, and let streams of inspiring soma flow. 
5636 :Indra, illustrious lord of the world, ruler and commander of human forces, karmayogi, when you are invoked by people anywhere east or west, north or south, up or down, then, O lord of excellence, you feel highly impelled by those many and come and act as the destroyer of many evils for the people of reverence and exceptional strength. 
5637 :And since, O lord Indra, you go to the celebrants, illustrious, child-like innocent and the humble and kind alike, sit with them, socialise and enjoy, so the dedicated admirers and learned men of vision and wisdom offer homage and reverence, exalt you with sacred hymns and say : Come, O lord, and accept our tributes and homage. 
5638 :O lord almighty, we adore you and wait for your blessings as lowing cows not yet milked wait for the master. Indra, lord of glory, you are ruler of the moving world and you are ruler of the unmoving world and your vision is bliss. 
5639 :There is none other like you, neither heavenly nor earthly, neither bom nor yet to be born. O lord of power and glory, we invoke you and pray for veteran scholars, dynamic scientists and technologists and the light of the divine Word of knowledge. 
5640 :May our people, wives and children be rich in wealth, knowledge and grace of culture, so that we, abundant and prosperous, may rejoice with them and live with them in happy homes in a state of honour and glory. 
5641 :Lord of inviolable might, yourself your own definition, omniscient, instantly comprehending all that moves, you manifest your presence to the vision of your celebrants just as the one axle of two chariot wheels (moving, caring yet unmoved). 
5642 :Lord of a hundred blissful acts of the yajna of creation, who by the prayers and pious actions of the celebrants come into their vision and experience like the axis of a wheel, you fulfill their love and desire wholly and entirely. 
5643 :That Lord of the universe, Omnipotent Light of creation, is the Sun, Savita, who holds and sustains the light and grandeur of the sun pervading in the world of action. And it is He who withdraws and folds up the same divinity and grandeur of the sun. And when the Lord withdraws the light of the sun, then the Night of Pralaya absorbs everything of existence into her fold of darkness. (This is the story of the eternal round of evolution and involution of the universe.) When the sun, in the daily round of day-light and darkness at night, collects the rays of light from down below then the night spreads her cover of darkness over all. (This is the story of the daily round of the day- night cycle.) The Eternal Lord, in order that Mitra and Varuna, day and night, be seen, creates light and shade and form. And so, the sun, which is light incarnate, in the close space of heaven, shows the forms of things. Endless, different and blazing is its power of one sort, while the shade of darkness is another, which the rays of the sun bear in the quarters of space. 
5644 :When would the Lord, sublime and wondrous, ever greater, ever friendly, shine in our consciousness and bless us? With what gifts of protection and promotion? What highest favour of our choice? What order of grace? What is the truest and highest of joys and foods for body, mind and soul that may please you? What wealth and value of life to help you break through the limitations and settle on the rock-bed foundation of permanence? Friend of friends and protector of celebrants you are, come and bless us too with a hundred modes of protection and advancement. Be ours, O lord! Let us proceed and win our goals across these regions of the world and let all divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity be favourable to us. 
5645 :Indra, the sun, the wind, and electric energy of the firmament with all year’s phases of the sun supports, strengthens and promotes our yajna, our body’s health and our future generations. 
5646 :May Indra, ruling powers of the world, with all natural and human forces, winds and stormy troops, across the suns phases over the year be the protector and promoter of our health of body and social organizations. Divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity attain to their divine positivity when they come together to preserve, protect and promote the forces of creativity and destroy the demonic forces of negativity and destruction. 
5647 :When the divinities and nobilities of nature offer their yajnic homage at their best to Indra, then they see and experience divine inspiration and vigour descending on them from Divinity through nature to humanity. Thus may we too offer adoration and seek to share divine favour and inspiration fit for dedicated humanity and live a full happy hundred years blest with noble and heroic generations of progeny. 
5648 :Indra, all powerful ruler of the world, subduer of all enemies of the world, drive off all enemies that stand in front, who attack from behind, who arise from below, and all those who descend from above so that we may live in peace with joy without fear in your vast territory. 
5649 :Well then, just as master farmers of grain harvest the crop in order and separate the grain from the chaff, so, dear lord, here, there, everywhere, in order, create and provide food and sustenance for those who never neglect yajnic offerings but bear the holy grass and bring homage to the vedi. 
5650 :A one horse cart never reaches the destination on time according to season and purpose, nor, in battle, supplies are received on time without the favour of Indra. Therefore nobles and sages well desirous of cows and horses, seeking success and victory, pray for the favour and friendship of the generous and virile Indra. 
5651 :O Ashvins, complementary powers of humanity, men and women, scholars and teachers, masters and protectors of the good, valuable and auspicious, well enjoying the soma taste of life together, help and assist Indra, ruler of life in the world, in the struggles of life and society against the demonic forces of want, violence and meanness. 
5652 :As parents support the child with all their power and potential, so O lord of power and glory, Indra, let the Ashvins, complementary powers of nature and society, men and women, scholars and scientists, leaders and followers, all support you with words of adoration and actions of profuse generosity when you defend the nation with bold actions and enjoy the peace, prosperity and power of the order, and may Sarasvati, divine intelligence, support and guide you. 
5653 :May Indra, self-potent, saviour protector and promoter, master of all wealth, power and glory of the world, be gracious to us by his support and protection for peace and security. May he ward off and drive away hate and enmity, grant freedom from fear, so that we too may be masters and protectors of noble strength and heroic splendour. 
5654 :We pray may we ever abide in the good will and loving kindness of adorable Indra. May he, self- refulgent, self-potent, saviour protector, keep off from us and drive away for all time elements of hate and enmity far and near, all. 
5655 :The creatures having been created flowed forth, streamed too far and strayed from acknowledgement of the creator Indra, where Vrshapkapi, the human soul, jivatma, top master among the created, rejoiced among them. 
5656 :My friend and favourite, Indra, great and generous, is supreme over the whole creation, says Indra, far too far you move from Vrshakapi who feels too sorrow stricken. O jivatma you would not find anywhere else other than Indra’s presence to enjoy the soma joy of life... Indra is supreme over all. 
5657 :What has this Vrshakapi done to you, this golden green natural, who needs initiation but who is the top master spirit of the created, toward whom you show so much resentment? Indra, your darling Vrshakapi whom you protect and favour so much falls a victim to greed which crushes him in its jaws as a hound seizes a boar by the ear. Indra is supreme over the whole creation. 
5658 :And all my dear forms of existence wrought into beauteous being, he pollutes. I would rather push his head down, I would not be good and never allow him anything too easily for this sinner. 
5659 :There is no other creative consort of Indra other than Prakrti, no female more charming, more agreeable, more pliant, more responsive, more attractive and more elevating, none other than me. 
5660 :Mother Nature, Prakrti, blessed and blissful fertility and giver of virility, whatever is to be shall be. My breast, my loins, my head all vibrate with energy, your gift. Indra is supreme over all. 
5661 :O lady of lovely arms and nimble fingers, wavy hair and ample zone, divine consort of omnipotence, why do you arraign Vrshakapi, why blame jivatma? This naughty thinks of me as naught, bereft of the brave, while I am blest with heroes, and I am the creative consort of Indra and friend of the Maruts, stormy troops of the winds of nature. 
5662 :The creative force in original time receives the cosmic seed and stirs into action for the dynamics of creative evolution. For this very reason, Prakrti, impregnated with the cosmic seed, is exalted as the consort of Indra, mother of the universal brave, controller of the laws of existence. 
5663 :So have I heard of Indrani among the creative dames as the mother of glory. Never shall her lord, Indra, ever die of old age like others, men of mortal nature. Indra is supreme over all. 
5664 :O divine consort, Indrani, I never enjoy the play of existence without my friend and companion, Vrshakapi, generous playful humanity, since the havi given by him and given for nature and humanity goes up and reaches the divinities which I share. 
5665 :O Vrshakapayi, mother Prakrti, provider of living beings, opulent and abundant power, mother of noble children and giver of joy and bliss, mother fertility, Indra would ultimately take over and consume whatever dear, creative and inspiring havi you would offer here in the created world. 
5666 :Natural powers of creative mother Prakrti ripen, mature and give up fifteen evolutionary forms of matter, energy and mind with twenty parts of the biological systems which I swallow at the completion of the existential cycle and I feel satisfied with the involutionary consumption of the Rtam and Satyam modes of existence. Indra is supreme over all. 
5667 :lords over the herds of cattle with pride, so may the joyous process of the creative cycle which the dedicated celebrant and loving Prakrti enacts for you give you satisfaction and joy at heart as lord and master of the world. 
5668 :That person does not rule over the self whose hedonic mind roams and rambles around among objects of sensual pleasure. That person rules as master of the self whose radiant mind in a state of peace and freedom blossoms and expands in spiritual wakefulness. Indra is supreme over all. 
5669 :That person whose radiant mind in a state of peace and freedom blossoms and expands in spiritual wakefulness does not rule the world of Prakrti. The master that rules the world of Prakrti is the power whose ecstatic presence in peace and sovereignty pervades in and over space and time. Indra is supreme over all. 
5670 :Indra, lord omnipresent and omnipotent, let this Vrshakapi, lover of joyous showers and shaker of thoughts of evil, know and realise that the duality between the self and the super self is ended. Then he will attain the soul inspiring pranic energy, creative intelligence, new spirit of yajnic performance and full achievement of the saving light of divinity. 
5671 :Perceiving the light of knowledge, building up my score of yajnic action, I come to the omnificent vibrant presence of divinity, and I drink of the nectar of the light and life of purity, eternity and direct realisation of divine communion. Indra is greater than the world of existence. 
5672 :The desert land, the dead-wood or the dark abyss, whatever, wherever, howsoever many they be, they must be given up. Come closer to your own homes, shelter of the closest divinity. Indra is supreme over all the world. 
5673 :O Vrshakapi, come again and both of us would create good things for your peace and comfort in well being. Thus destroying the state of dream and sleep, this lover of showers and breeze, Vrshakapi, comes home by the paths of existence and piety again and again. Indra is supreme over all the world. 
5674 :O Vrshakapi, O Indra, when the higher souls come rising to the state of peace in the divine home, then where does the sinner, the vexatious and the seeker roaming around go, to what state of life? The creative and catalytic power of omniscient Indra, universal mother, together creates twenty varying modes of matter, energy and thought for physical, biological and intelligent forms of existence. O noble soul, blessed be the mother who suffers the travail to bear the transmigrant soul on way to earthly pleasure and pain and then the bliss divine. Great is Indra, greater than all, supreme over all the world. 
5675 :Listen ye all carefully this: The man of virtue worthy of praise and adoration is going to be celebrated. O man of power and joy on earth, from among those who have given up hate and violence and ward off anger and fear, we select and accept sixty thousand and ninety (virtues). 
5676 :(The mantra is highly mystical: ‘Sixty thousand and ninety is interpreted as virtues and as divine gifts, and also as defenders of peace.) Here is the adorable man ruler, the leading light, whose grand chariot, twenty virile bulls draw and the radiating rays of the sun touch, energise and bless with light and beauty. 
5677 :(Another, mystic, interpretation is given by professor Vishvanath Vidyalankar: Here is the yogi whose body system, twenty perceptive and volitional senses and pranas energise and move just as the radiant rays of the sun keep the heaven and earth radiant and inspiring.) We honour this ruling light of wisdom, vision and grandeur for his support and celebration, and offer him a hundred gold coins, ten garlands, three hundred horses and ten thousand cows. 
5678 :When the time is ripe, O celebrant, speak, sing and celebrate the Lord as the bird chirps on the tree when the fruit is ripe, for, when the time is gone and the fruit is no more, the tongue would flutter in the mouth for nothing, with regret may be, like the blade of scissors for no purpose. 
5679 :As brave and generous bulls and cows in the world of nature, so grateful celebrants, in the world of humanity, with their mind and intelligence sing and celebrate the Lord, raise their children and retire. Thus do they and their children, as brave and generous bulls and cows, live at home in peace and maintain the homely tradition of grateful creative living. 
5680 :O celebrant, bear and mature the intelligence which brings knowledge and wisdom, and the wealth, honour and excellence of the world. O man of faith in Divinity, sharpen and pefect the Word Divine and your voice as the perfect archer sharpens and calibrates his arrow for the bow to hit his target. 
5681 :O singer and celebrant, sing and intensify your praise of the universal ruler, loving benefactor of the world, who is one Lord refulgent immortal among mortals, universal spirit of humanity, present and vibrating in every form and particle of existence. 
5682 :The man of discrimination and detachment, taking his seat of stability, dispels darkness and does good to all: thus does the house holder, a man of action, speak to his wife while establishing a new home for his family. 
5683 :What shall I bring for you? Curds, buttermilk or barley meal stirred in milk, or the famous soma juice? This does every wife ask and offer her husband in happy dominion of the universal ruler, present and ruling everywhere. 
5684 :Ripe barley and all round wealth moves by paths of transport from the fields to the circulation. Thus do the people enjoy peace, plenty and prosperity in the dominion of the universal ruler. 
5685 :Indra, universal ruler, wakes up the poet and artist and inspires him: Rise, go among the people and proclaim my message of love, passion and action, and the entire citizenry would listen, honour and reward you to your satisfaction. 
5686 :Let cows, lands and cultures grow, increase and rise high here in this dominion of Indra. Let horses and other modes of transport grow and develop here. Let men and women grow and advance here in peace and prosperity. Here Pusha, lord of health, well being and all round growth, giver of a thousand boons, rules and abides here with the people. 
5687 :Hey Indra, lord ruler of the world, let not the cows, lands and culture suffer here, nor let their master and protector suffer any harm. Let no thief, let no enemy rule over there. 
5688 :O lord of the universe, we thank you that you never neglect us. Bless us that we may praise you with noble hymns and words of praise. Let noble words free from pain and sufferance ever resound and come to us. Let us never suffer any harm, guilt or negativity. 
5689 :The man who is worthy of the assembly, who is worthy of learned society, who has distilled and attained to the essence and meaning of things and then is dedicated to yajna, creative work for all in cooperation, that man and the sun, the divinities have, prepared and seasoned as top destroyers of sin and suffering of disease. 
5690 :The man who abuses a sister or any sisterly woman, or who deceives and violates a friend, and he that is the eldest and yet behaves like a man void of sense and reason, such a man, they say, is the lowest and meanest of all. 
5691 :When the son of a noble man becomes bold and valorous and puts the evil down, then the man of knowledge and Vedic wisdom says good and lovable words about him. 
5692 :But whoever is calculative, smallest among men of small mind, whoever is mean and ungiving toward the noble and generous, of him we have heard from the patient wise men of universal values that he is unworthy of mixing with the noble ones. 
5693 :Those who are generous and noble at heart, perform yajna and give in charity rise as the sun rises in heaven and become men of wealth, honour and brilliance of excellence. 
5694 :Whoever is a man of ungracious eye, whoever is not generous and kind at heart, whoever, though he be the son of a Brahmana, is un-learned and unpriestlike at yajna, all these are believed to be unworthy and undeserving of gold and jewel distinction in society and in learned programmes. 
5695 :Whoever is a man of gracious eye and generous of heart, who is learned and worthy of being the high priest of yajna, being son of a Brahmana, deserves to wear gold and jewel distinctions and is honoured in society and in learned programmes. 
5696 :A water resort without the availability of water, a rich man without charity, a comely girl without the fertility of marriage and procreation, all these are believed to be equally unworthy in society for social purpose and programmes. 
5697 :A water resort with ample availability of water, a rich man with generous charity, a comely girl gentle and fertile for marriage and procreation, all these are believed to be equally worthy in society for noble social values and programmes. 
5698 :A great woman, even a queen, but abandoned, a self-interested, ease loving warrior unwilling for battle, a lazy horse and a lazy servant, all these are believed to be unworthy in society, equally unfit for social purposes. 
5699 :A great woman, a queen, active loved and favoured, a healthy warrior keen for battle, a swift horse and a smart servant, all these are believed to be equally worthy in society for social purposes. 
5700 :Indra, when you churned man for his behaviour as he acted in slavery to the rule of his lower senses and mind over the spirit, that corrective response appeared to be unkind. But in reality that was to re-educate the man toward the yajnic way of living intelligently according to higher reason. 
5701 :Lord of the world’s wealth and power, resplendent as the sun and generous as a rain cloud, maker of men as you are, pray make man happy and long lived and humble, you throw off the cover of darkness and break the head of the evil perpetrator. 
5702 :You who hold and sustain the mountains, who chum, roll and make the oceans flow, O Indra, mighty great who destroy darkness and evil, for all this power and splendour, salutations in homage to you! To the nation and the ruler of high fame running after wealth and power, excellence and fame, divine voices spoke: O nation, O ruler, for victory over peace and well being, honour and glory, invoke and win the grace of Indra, Lord Almighty, who holds the garland of glory for you. ( Here the ‘ashva’ may also be interpreted as mind running after senses.) Hey Indra, those who are pure and spotless, who have won imperishable honour and fame and have withdrawn their worldly desires and ambitions, and who join you, Omnificent Lord, every one of them, front ranker among divine personalities, bearing you at heart in the soul, they are great, happy and exalted. 
5703 :These senses, mental fluctuations, wander around after the objects they love to feed on. 
5704 :They run after temptations, objects good and bad, counter to each other, to and even against man’s love of soma and yajna. 
5705 :Of them, one is dedicated to divinity, alleviator of suffering, the Saviour. 
5706 :I am in search of love and faith, a noble child of golden virtue born of divinity. 
5707 :Where is the hit, that which ought to be hit and rejected? There where those cursed and cursing ones, three mental fluctuations reside and lurk on. 
5708 :All those three, evil, disturbing and mixed, i.e., tamasika, rajasika and mixed, black, white and opaque. 
5709 :They hiss, raise their fangs and persist, to strike. 3T^F5^T ft 1 3Tct%: II ^ II He comes, moves whoever desires and wards off the undesirables. 
5710 :The lord of light and knowledge controls and eliminates the fluctuations of mind and senses. 
5711 :O man, in the prolific world of nature, why want something undesirable? The home of clay, Prakrti, body, senses, passion and reason, all is at your disposal, they serve you for your experience of living. 
5712 :Warrior of horse and under the hoof of a cow, crushed by the material world? Nature as reason and intelligence, in Satvika form, is a saving power too. 
5713 :She can lick away the innocent as well as provide for health, light and revelation of knowledge and wisdom. 
5714 :Who shoots the many arrows of the world at you, O man? Who brings you the fruit of uncontrolled acts of mental darkness? Who brings you the fruit of enlightened eats of the mind? Who brings you the fruit of attractive but blurred activities of mind? Ask this of the man of the mystery of life. <^|ch TTcFgcf; -qN^n ^ u Ask this of the veteran man of the mysteries of existence. 
5715 :Ask the smart and youthful who shines over the earthly and the industrious. 
5716 :The man of peace free from hate and anger is saviour of earth from evil and negativities. 
5717 :The speaker and teacher is the man of love and power among others. 
5718 :Let the collected toll of sin be burnt as havi in the yajna fire. 
5719 :Holy sage, you have given us a wealth of progress into moral and spiritual wealth. 
5720 :Our friends go and meet the sage, child of loving Mother Nature and divine knowledge. 
5721 :Give man the knowledge of earthly life, uproot the love and sufferance of worldly passion and evil. 
5722 :And let the man of holiness be moving, moving, ever onwards. 
5723 :Otherwise their share would be little, that too sufferance. 
5724 :One who forsakes sensual temptations comes to good for mind and soul. 
5725 :The obstacles of his spiritual journey are removed, eliminated. 
5726 :Varuna, lord of grace, moves and blesses him with the riches of his divine gifts. 
5727 :Hundreds are mother Bharati’s, Nature’s, gifts for him, She bears these for her child. 
5728 :Hundreds of golden gifts, horses and warriors, hundreds of chariot gifts of golden grace and beauty, hundreds of elephants decked with gold, hundreds of golden garlands and vessels laden with gold mohurs, these follow and court him. (Refer Yoga-sutras of Patanjali, 2, 37 and 39: If a person is established in renunciation and is free from greed and hoarding, all wealths of the world stand around him to attend and serve. But his choice stands higher and remains firm, for nothing short of divine grace.) The man without the plough, dedicated to the yajna-vedi sits on the grass in meditation. 
5729 :Lives as one with the root of the tree of existence. 
5730 :Those who are absolutely dedicated are never forsaken. 
5731 :This is the joy for me, this Grace! fr^STT: wf^HfrTII ^11 Uprooted, in-rooted, they abide unshaken, the Master, the Mother, abides with them. 
5732 :This life on top of maturity is food for Divinity, offered as havi for the sacred fire. 
5733 :Lord omnipotent, all power and potential is surrendered in homage to you. 
5734 :O devotee, undisturbed and stable in mind, risen pure above mental fluctuations of lower order, you are now redeemed to your original purity. 
5735 :Risen above existential involvements, come to absolute renunciation and freedom. 
5736 :Even latencies in the unconscious are silenced, dead as if. 
5737 :O man, you are one with the Supreme Purusha. qyfcbnji 11 I have received the life-giving milk of the Divine Presence. 
5738 :Two are the yogi’s arms of action which cut the existential knot to heavenly freedom: practice and renunciation. 
5739 :Just as the gourd floats on water, so the One that ‘floats’, i.e., transcends, the ocean of existence is Brahma. 
5740 :And the One that transcends as well as saves us from drowning in the ocean of existence is Brahma who uproots darkness and ignorance and that way saves us. 
5741 :Brahma that creates and winds up the world of existence is the One that uproots darkness and ignorance. 
5742 :That is the wind and storm that churns and shakes up the world of existence. 
5743 :It is that who makes and directs the homes and families of humanity, nests for birds and dens for animals. 
5744 :Let man love and worship the awesome Brahma, omnipresent which comprehends both space and time. 
5745 :Let man not worship any power and presence which is not the omnipresent umbrella presence in, over and beyond the world of nature. 
5746 :Who is the creator and sustainer who writes the karmic destiny of all these souls? It is Ka, the Supreme Brahma. 
5747 :Who blows the trumpet to wind up the game of the life of these souls? It is Ka, the Lord Supreme. 
5748 :If it is Brahma that blows the last trumpet, how does he blow? If it is Nature, even so, how? If it is divine Nature that blows the trumpet, where does it blow? Nature blows the trumpet in every home, and it does so again and again. 
5749 :Three are the names of the saviour from sufferings of body, mind and soul. 
5750 :Some say It is Hiranya, Hiranyagarbha, that is, beautiful, loving, good and gracious, Satvika. 
5751 :Others, sharp of intelligence, say It is twofold: of dual power and potential: power and honour. 
5752 :They say It is the bearer and sustainer of the dark and colourfu There is twofold flow of psychic energy expansive in the worldly life of man, i.e., the flow of Tamasic and Rajasic fluctuations of the mind. These the Supreme Purusha reduces and eliminates for the salvation of the spirit. 
5753 :No innocent maiden, it is not so as you think and believe. 
5754 :Well, the two streams of fluctuation flow from your Mother Nature herself. And of those two tortuous, ultimately unreal and confusive streams, man is relieved by Mother Nature herself in the natural course. 
5755 :No, innocent maiden, it is not so as you think and believe. (Nature has no absolute will of her own. She gives you the field for play by a higher law, only that.) Having controlled the two flows when you restrict them somewhere in the middle, even then you continue the involvement. Release and freedom, innocent maiden, is not as you think and believe. 
5756 :Abiding and stabilising yourself whether for the expansive as express. Release and freedom, innocent maiden, is not possible the way you think and believe. 
5757 :In the reduced as well as in the refined fluctuations you only hide and retain their latencies in the subtlest form. Release and freedom, innocent maiden, is not possible the way you think and believe. 
5758 :Let even the subtlest form of latencies, vasanas and sanskaras, be eliminated by the root from the heart and the karmashoya in the psyche. That alone will lead to release and freedom. (This is possible by relentless practice of Abhyasa and absolute renunciation, Parama Vairagya, on your part, and the descent of grace from Above: Yogasutra, 1, 12 and 23.) Release and freedom, innocent maiden, is not possible the way you think and believe (either by nature or by yourself). 
5759 :Here thus on earth, east, west, north or south, O man, weak of will, afraid to be staright, try to be upright with honest self-criticism and effort for self- improvement. 
5760 :Here thus on earth, east, west, north or south, children try and rise to adulthood and act as men. 
5761 :Here thus on earth, east, west north or south, holy food is prepared for the sacred fire of yajna. 
5762 :Here thus on earth, east, west, north or south, that very holy food for the action, fire of yajna, is Here thus on earth, east, west, north or south, dynamic reason and intelligence is destined to be your share. 
5763 :Here thus on earth, east, west, north or south, calculative intellect and pragmatic reason also follows higher rationality. 
5764 :Sufferance as well as enjoyment is experienced. Initiative and action is gone forward. The fruit of action is source. O celebrants, let us beat the drum loud with the sticks, speech and action, that Divinity is there that shapes our ends. 
5765 :Like a purse of money, wealth kept safe in the chest at night, or the foot safeguarded in the shoe, may the lord creator give our soul, men and women, birth in the best species, i.e., best of humans, and lead men and women on the best path of life. 
5766 :Just as the gourd helps us to cross over the water, so does the Lord help us cross the seas of existence. Just as rain sprinkles the earth, so does the Lord bless us with joy, the Lord that rides the chariot of Time and withdraws his creation in a moment of time. He gives the energy of breath even to the ants. He is the original cause of thunder and lightning and the root of leaves and herbs. He also is the root and root-mover of the stars and planets and the inspirer of our senses and mind. O celebrants of Divinity, O Lord Divine of all that exists, let us all rise with divine inspiration. 
5767 :nobilities of humanity, move on in their orbits. O Adhvaryu, organiser of life-yajna, you too move forward. O Lord of existence, you are the real spirit of joy of all the moving forms of existence, and you are the spirit of Joy itself. 
5768 :O celebrants of life, O lord divine, a wife is seen as wife when she is honoured and accepted as such while offering oblations into the sacred fire, whereby we rise in life, and when the husband, performer of yajna, showers her with the sweetness of his love whereby, too, O celebrant, O lord divine, we rise in life. 
5769 :O celebrant Adityas, Brahmchari students of the highest brilliant order, bring the Dakshina, gift of gratitude, for the vibrant scholars of life sciences, and the same gift of gratitude, O celebrant, the scholars return to the harbingers in the form of knowledge, yes, O celebrant, they return it to the disciples. 
5770 :O celebrant, just as the distinguished scholars accepted our gifts of homage, similarly, O celebrant, you too accept our gifts. For just as there is no vision and awareness of anything anywhere without the light of the day, similarly we do not move forward without yajna, i.e., meeting, discussion, and exchange of gifts and views. 
5771 :By the light of the day and by joint yajnic study, the spotless most youthful scholar of clear intelligence moving at flying speed, stage by stage of Vedic studies, achieves the desired distinction and progress at the earliest. 
5772 :O scholar of life and life energy, Angira, these Adityas, Brahmacharis of highest order, Rudras of the middle order, Vasus of the first order, achieve this gift of knowledge and progressive success under your care. Pray you too receive and acknowledge thanks and this further advancement. This achievement in life energy is vast and powerful, this knowledge is comprehensive and expansive. 
5773 :O teachers and pupils, may the divinities of nature and brilliant sages and scholars give you that inspiring knowledge of life and pranic energy. May that knowledge be your enlightenment for advancement of mind and soul. May it be yours, higher and greater day by day, and may you continue to receive and advance it in response. 
5774 :O ruler of knowledge and power, Indra, by simple and peaceful means and methods bring the wealth of knowledge, prosperity and peace worthy of yajnic development from the scholars of scientific and ultimate Spiritual enlightenment for the seekers of the knowledge of science and spirit and for the celebrant devotee for the elimination of the disreputation of knowledge and power flowing from it. 
5775 :O ruler, Indra, you have provided ample food of ripe shyamaka grain, pilu fruit and water for the quaking bird with broken wing and for the abandoned wanderer. 
5776 :The man of mere praise, without discrimination, thrice bound by worldly snares of body, mind and soul, extols mere food that is delicious for the body and rejects what is no good food to his taste. 
5777 :When the small as well as great acts of the people who clear out sin and crime from society are appreciated by the ruler and the enlightened officers, they, the ruler and the elite, captivate the heart of the people and they shine in their eyes as Shakula fish shine in a little pool of water, and the thieves quake in fear. 
5778 :When by the strong force of the law of the dominion the ruler punishes the thieves, men and women both, even in the smallest cases of violation, all citizens of the dominion rise and grow, enjoying happily, like white flowers on the sandy beach sprinkled with water. 
5779 :When among the smallest of the small citizens of a nation, the people are made to fall like smallest berries from the main branch, then in that state of distress they rise with heat of passion for peace and freedom as from cold into warmth of the sun in spring after winter. 
5780 :Just as noble people go to an eminent and reasonable judge for justice, just as a noble woman is distinguished by her body, so do men of reason find out the truth by direct observation of evidence. 
5781 :The man of greatness should feed and satisfy two fires: the fire of yajna and the fire of hunger. Nor should he hesitate to take the risk of going to untrodden fields. So may we, lovers of strength and vigour, find good food and barley sattu in our dishes. 
5782 :The man of two great fires should go beyond the mortar and pestle and say: O Vanaspati, lord of the woods, as we pound the grain in the mortar to refine it, so may we reflect upon our consciousness within and refine ourselves with knowledge. 
5783 :The man of two great fires, of ripe understanding and destroyer of weakness, should be able to say: O Vanaspati, lord of the woods and fire, as man fills up the mortar with grain to refine it and feed the fire, so may it be with us, filling ourselves with knowledge, refine ourselves to wisdom and vision and feed the spirit for peace and enlightenment leading to bliss. 
5784 :The man of two great fires, spiritual light and moral passion, of ripe understanding and destroyer of weakness, tempered in fire and illuminated within, should be able to say: The link of life and age with nature having been burnt, all snares of pleasure and pain and all temptations of pearls and jewels are consumed in the light of heaven and eliminated. 
5785 :The man of two great fires, spiritual light and moral passion for social good, as the ruler of life, should be able to say of the dominion inspired by its own dynamics and discrimination of the fruit and taste of the tree of human life and its organisation: let us find and enjoy our share of the light of the will of heaven. 
5786 :The man of two great fires courts the peacock with bird feed in a sacred vessel and says: it is so because we do not know any musk deer that holds the musk on is head for the hunter nor any hunter who carries the bait on his head. 
5787 :The man of two great fires follows after the greater man of both the fires, spiritual and social. O Yama, lord of law and human destiny, protect the lands, cows and cultural traditions of this great man and provide the rice meal for me. 
5788 :O great man of two fires, the Great lord of all the world well spares and protects you against the possible dangers of social breach and division. The great man should only attain to peace, love and unity with the people. 
5789 :O people, a policy which is fruitless and uncreative, even if it is strong and passionate, is no good, throw it far off. Do not burn your fingers. Well being is great, and the Great is well being. O Yama, lord of law and human destiny, give me the rice meal, simple and pure. 
5790 :O great man of two fires, the Great lord of peace of all the world well spares and protects you against the possible dangers of social breach and divisions of great order. The holy maiden, innocent and beautiful, with mud and ash, washes and sanctifies the floor of the house, saves it from internal dirt. 
5791 :The great one is good and kind for the social order, beneficent like a bilva tree, abundant and generous like the udumbara tree. O renowned ruler and citizen, the great one well protects you and the social order against terrible dissensions and calamities. 
5792 :As a youthful maiden, brave and comely, may attain and welcome the spring season after winter, she deserves it, so should the good and great ruler and leader protect the pure and innocent people against want and suffering as you would urgently protect your finger from a cauldron of boiling oil. 
5793 :When floods of water flow forth bearing iron ore, rejoicing as if with croaking frogs, all adversities, enemies of humanity, disappear like bubbles, at once. 
5794 :Noble yajakas, Divinity is kind. Hold the gracious presence in the depths of the mind, move it for grace, rejoice in the presence and pray for food, energy and fulfilment of life. Adore and exalt the divine spirit of Eternity, Indra, for freedom from bondage and for the ecstasy of being here on earth itself. 
5795 :We sing in praise of Dadhikra, divine energy, victorious, all achieving spirit and power, who may, we pray, refine our sense of taste and other refinements and may help us live a full and healthy life across the floods of existence. 
5796 :Filtered, felt and cleansed, honey sweet soma streams, pure and exhilarating, flow for Indra, the soul, and may the exhilarations reach you, noble favourite of divinity. 
5797 :Soma, divine, brilliant and blissful, flows for Indra, the soul, say the noble sages, and thus Soma, divine source and master of speech and thought, ruler and sustainer of the entire world by his own lustre and power, is honoured at all yajnas of knowledge, yoga and austerity, for advancement. 
5798 :A thousand streams of Soma joy and enlightenment flow, inspiring and purifying. It is a bottomless ocean that rolls impelling the language and thought of new knowledge. It is the preserver, promoter and sustainer of all wealths and honours and a friend of the soul, inspiring and exalting us day by day. 
5799 :The dark passion of pride with its ten thousand assistants and associates comes, occupies the affections and suppresses the emotive and creative streams of life, but Indra, noble leader of men, the soul, with its great thought and action, takes this bully over, controls its violence and covers it with sweetness and love. 
5800 :I have seen the dark devil of passion and pride roaming around widely and variously on the banks of the vibrant stream of life. O mighty energies of prana and divine potential, I wish you fight in the battle and, like unfailing agents of cleansing of dirt, throw out the dark evil standing out and working boldly as well as surreptitiously. 
5801 :When the dark passion is cleansed out, then pure vitality, lustrous and sparkling, sustains itself in the lap of creative life aflow. Indra, exuberant soul purified and tempered, in cooperation with wide ranging pranic energies, challenges and fights out the unholy tendencies of carnal mind ranging around. 
5802 :Thus does Indra become a victorious enemy for the seven unrivalled unholy tendencies of sense and mind and emerges a brilliant unrivalled hero. Thus does he find the real joyous heaven and earth, otherwise, for him, covered in deep darkness. Thus do you, O soul, bear and bring happiness to the regions of life vested in dignity and excellence. 
5803 :You, virile commander of thunderous strength, most daring hero, by your virile and thunderous force of personality you won unequalled lustre and dignity. With your deadly weapons, you overcame the ravages of famine, deprivation and exploitation, and with your courage and conscientious action you won lands and cows and conquered your own carnal self. 
5804 :That Indra, dynamic and enlightened mind and intelligence, we cultivate and strengthen for the elimination of the great waste, deep ignorance and suffering prevailing in the world. May that light and mind be exuberant and generous for us with showers of enlightenment. 
5805 :Indra, mind and intelligence, was created for enlightenment and for giving enlightenment. Most lustrous and powerful, it is engaged in the creation of joy. It is rich in the wealth of knowledge, praise-worthy, and cool, gentle and at peace in the state of enlightenment. 
5806 :Held in and by the voice of divinity like the roar of thunder and like the flood of sun-rays, it is powerful, unfallen, irrepressible and lofty with thought, so let it express itself freely. 
5807 :Great is Indra by his power and splendour like the cloud charged with rain and waxes with pleasure in the dear devotee’s awareness by his child like hymns of adoration. 
5808 :When the forces of nature carry on the laws of divinity and sustain the children of creation through evolution, and the enlightened sages too carry on the yajna of divine law of truth in their adorations, Indra, immanent divinity, waxes with pleasure. 
5809 :When the wise sages with their adorations rise to Indra and surrender to him as their yajnic destination, they exclaim: Verily the lord of thunder is our brother, father, mother, sister, everything. 
5810 :Ashvins, harbingers of light and peace, for sure now come for the protection and progress of your loved people and provide for them a spacious peaceful home free from violence and insecurity and ward off all forces of malice, adversity and enmity. 
5811 :Whatever manly strength and wealth there be in heaven and mid space worthy of five classes of people, Ashvins, bear and bring for us. 
5812 :Ashvins, whatever your actions and achievements which the scholars have known and thought over, reveal the same to the modern scholar too. 
5813 :This is the yajnic fire of the season, Ashvins, which is dedicated and exalted in your honour with the chant of hymns, and this is the soma sweetened and seasoned for you, O heroes of the battle for wealth and victory, by which you would know and dare the enemy, the demon of darkness, ignorance, injustice and poverty. 
5814 :Ashvins, heroic powers of nature’s complementary forces, the power and vitality which you have vested in the waters, herbs and trees is multifarious. Pray, with that same vitality and power, bless and protect me too and let me advance. 
5815 :Ashvins, harbingers of energy, health and replenishment, ever true unfailing agents of natural law and life’s growth, when you vibrate, radiate and energise, when you nourish, heal, resuscitate and revive things to live and grow, this conscientious darling seeker of your power and presence understands you not by observation, analysis and thought, in your entirety, because you reveal yourself only to the faithful who come to you with homage. (Life is a mystery. You can know the secret of this mystery only by being what it is, by identifying with it in meditation.) In truth, the visionary sage has realised the song and story of the Ashvins, radiations of life energy, in every detail from inception to completion by faithful intention and relentless application of mind, and he has fed the fire of his yajnic search and research with the sweetest and most vibrating soma of his life’s passion into the vedi. 
5816 :Ashvins, take to the fastest chariot now and come by the shortest straight path. These hymns of adoration burst forth from me like an explosion in space, reach you like the sun and draw you hither. 
5817 :Ashvins, ever dedicated to the divine truth of nature’s law, when we invoke you with hymns of adoration or by yajnic sessions or by words of yajakas today, pray take it that the call is the conscientious voice of the visionary sage in search for the light of his mission. 
5818 :Ashvins, when the cavalier or the pedestrian or the sagely seer or the long time plodder or the ruler or the intellectual calls on you for the yajnic session, you listen. Hence, pray listen to our call too and come. 
5819 :Come, be protectors of our home and family, be protectors of others too, be protectors of the world and protectors of our body’s health and social structure. Come home to us for the sake of our children and grand children. 
5820 :same chariot or abide with the wind in the same region, or you move across the sun’s zodiacs or with the cosmic makers, or you move and abide with the vibrance of the omnipresent, wherever you be, pray come to us too. 
5821 :When I call upon the Ashvins, defenders of humanity and protectors of life, for the sake of victory in our struggle for existence, or I call on them against the enemies in our conflicts with negativities, they would come, because their courage and force for the defence and protection of life is highest and best. 
5822 :Come, Ashvins, for sure without fail. These presentations, adorations and offerings of hospitality are reserved for you whether they are in the house of the stormy warrior or dynamic intellectual or artist or citizen or the sagely seer, they are for you and you alone. 
5823 :Ashvins, versatile powers of health and longevity, whatever food or sanative or efficacious remedies be there far or near, by that without fail, O masters of knowledge and expertise, provide a home of health and peace for the dear devotee free from the pride and arrogance of drugs and intoxication. 
5824 :I am awake by the divine voice of the Ashvins. O divine dawn of light, open the human mind to the light and freedom of reason and give the gift of wisdom to mortal humanity. 
5825 :O divine dawn, great lady of truth and leading light of a new day, awaken the Ashvins, harbingers of new knowledge and awareness, and O inspirer of the day’s yajnic activity, relentlessly exhort men and women to work for the joy of life and win great prosperity, honour and fame. 
5826 :O dawn, harbinger of a new day, when you rise with the first sun-rays and then join the sun and shine together with it, then the Ashvins’ chariot rolls on on its usual course of the day which preserves and promotes humanity in life and leads it to advancement. 
5827 :When the stout stalks of lotus receive their drink of green vitality from the sun as cows draw and receive their milk with the udders from nature, and just when the stalks yield pranic energy as cows yield milk, and when the voices of humanity rise in adoration of the Ashvins in prayer: Then for wealth, honour and excellence, for strength and courage and joy and prosperity, for the peace and protection of humanity and achievement of dexterity and competence, O harbingers of light and awareness, bless them. 
5828 :Adorable Ashvins, when with your thoughts and acts of the day you go back and sit in the parental home with all rest in peace, then come again and bless us with peace and prosperity of an active life. 
5829 :Ashvins, complementary currents of cosmic energy of the Divine, today we invoke you and call for that chariot of yours which is wide extended, joins earth and heaven, carries the light and energy of sunrays, ages not, carries the sound, and which is abundant in various wealth which never diminishes but continuously enriches the earth. 
5830 :Ashvins, children of light, infallible and imperishable, generous and brilliant divinities, with your intelligence, power and expertise, you win that treasure of wealth which the spaces conduct and concentrate in your chariot and thereby provide food and nourishment for your body and mind. 
5831 :Ashvins, who with the offer of homage today directs his thoughts and prayers to you for the sake of protection and advancement, or for the drink of soma in celebration of success, or to learn and win the truth of eternal Dharma of existence, Rtam? Who with salutations and liberal hospitality prays for favour of your attention toward him? Ashvins, twin powers of the Divine, universal of form and presence, ever constant in thought and action, come by the golden chariot to join this yajna of ours, drink of this honey sweet of the soma of success and bring the jewels of wealth for the supplicant people of action and endeavour. 
5832 :Come well and soon to us by the paths of heaven and earth, riding your well structured chariot of gold. Let not others detain you, nor divert you from the natural life link which the forefathers and teachers of old gave you in pursuit of Divinity. 
5833 :Ashivns, destroyers of evil and misery, brilliant as the sun and gracious cool as the moon, give us the wealth of life comprising brave children, great and vast prosperity for all of us, rulers as well as the people, since the leaders of the nation offer you songs of adoration and teachers of the people shower you with words of prayer in praise of Divinity. 
5834 :Ashvins, ever constant and true, here itself in this world, may this holy wisdom and knowledge of yours which is peaceable and procurative of science and speed of prosperity and progress, bless us, we pray. Both of you, we pray, protect, promote and elevate the celebrant. Our desire and ambition depends on you and we look forward up to you alone. 
5835 :May the herbs and trees, all vegetation indeed, be full of honey for us. May the heavens of light, the skies and the oceans of earth and space be full of honey for us. May the farmer, master of the field, be gracious with honey for us. And let us join, serve and cooperate with the farmer as well as with nature as we should, without hurting, injuring and polluting. 
5836 :Praiseworthy is that performance of yours, Ashvins, harbingers of new light, which is generous and rewarding, full of the light of heaven, showers of the cloud from the sky and generosity of the earth. Pray now come, assess and advance all those thousands of advancements we are pursuing in the field of earth sciences, solar energy and the development of cattle wealth, all of which are worthy of appreciation. This homage we offer to Brhaspati, lord of living waters and thunder, who reveals the eternal words of divine knowledge. May that lord bless us with good health and long age with lands, cows and the light of knowledge, horses, transport and advancement, brave progeny, leading lights and enlightened people. 
