1 :Come Agni, sung and celebrated, to join our feast of enlightenment, accept our homage to create the gifts of life and yajnic performance, and take the honoured seat in the assembly. (Rg. 6-16-10) 
2 :Agni, self-refulgent leading light of the universe, you are the chief highpriest of all yajnic developments of nature and of all creative and developmental programmes of humanity for common universal good along with the brilliancies of nature and nobilities of humanity among the human community. (Rg. 6-16-1) 
3 :WechooseAgni visibleand invisible, and invoke itwith faith and holy action, Agni which is the protector of the people, carrier of yajnic fragrance, and favourite of the wise. (Rg. 1-12-1) 
4 :Agni, leading light and ruler of the world, bright, pure and purifying, invoked, invited and lighted in the seat of yajna, keen on wealth, honour and excellence with self-approbation and public exaltation, should destroy the evils and endeavour to raise the power and prosperity of the human nation. (Rg. 6-16-34) 
5 :I sing and celebrate for you the glories of Agni, lord omniscient, light and leader of the world, dearest and most welcome as an enlightened guest, loving as a friend, who, like a divine harbinger, reveals the light of knowledge to us. (Rg. 8-84-1) 
6 :Agni, leading light of life, with your mighty powers and grandeur, protect us against all material, moral and social adversity and all mortal jealousy and enmity. (Rg. 8-71-1) 
7 :Agni, leading light and pioneer, come, listen, thus do I speak in honour of you, and listen further to higher words, and rise higher with these words sweet and soothing like rays of the moon and exciting as draughts of soma. (Rg. 6-16-16) 
8 :The dear dedicated sage adores you, Agni, and with words of love and faith prays for your attention from the highest heaven of light. (Rg. 8-11-7) 
9 :Agni, light of life, the wise scholar and devotee, Atharva, dedicated to love and non-violence, discovers and churns you out without violence from the highest sphere above the skies which supports and sustains the entire universe. (Rg. 6-16-13) 
10 :Agni, lord omniscient and self-refulgent, for our protection, progress and perfection of the highest order, bring us the light so that we may see. For us, you are Salutations to you, Agni, refulgent lord of generosity. The people too adore and exalt you. Pray ward off and throw out the enemies and unfriendly forces by your laws and powers. (Rg. 8-75-10) 
11 :Upa tva jamayo giro dedisatir haviskrtah. Vayor anike as t hi ran. M oving and vibrant adorations of the enlightened celebrant reach you and stay by you in the movements of air in the middle regions. (Rg. 8-102-13) 
12 :Agni, lord omniscient, day by day, night and day, with all our heart and soul we come to you bearing gifts of homage in faith and humility. (Rg. 1-1-7) 
13 :Hero of high knowledge and wide fame, create and provide for every people and offer to adorable yajnic Rudra, brilliant lord of justice and power, that wealth, honour and celebration which is magnificent and worthy of praise. (Rg. 1-27-10) 
14 :A gni, fire energy of nature, comewith the winds, you are invoked and kindled for the preservation and promotion of the beautiful holy yajna (of the earth for her children). (Rg. 1-19-1) 
15 :Agni, brilliant and illuminating power and presence of yajnas from the homely agnihotra to the highest programmes of humanity, like a tempestuous horse of flying hair, we praise you and celebrate you with homage and offerings of food and oblations. (Rg. 1-27-1) 
16 :Like a mature and self-disciplined sage and scholar of nature and spirit, I invoke and study Agni, the fire energy, concealed in the sea and the sky and the psychic energy abiding in the mind. (Rg. 8-102-4) 
17 :W hen the mortal starts Iighting thefire in the vedi, let him, with his whole mind in concentration, call up all his faculties of perception, thought and action and say: I light the fire with the sun rays and, all my knowledge, will and awareness, awaken the divine in the soul. (Rg. 8-102-22) 
18 :A nd then the devotees see like day light the selfrefulgence of the eternal lord and source of life who shines above and beyond the day through the night of annihilation too. (Rg. 8-6-30) 
19 :ancient power of the first order that leads you to advancement of strong familial unity and tolerant but powerful social cooperation for your coming generations for ages. (Rg. 8-102-7) 
20 :Agni, with the flaming light of pure refulgence, dries up and burns off all hostility of the world and brings the wealth of life for us, dedicated supplicants and celebrants. (Rg. 6-16-28) 
21 :Agni, be kind and gracious. Great you are as you come to these divinely dedicated people sitting round the fire of yajna and you bless them all round without reserve. (Rg. 4-9-1) 
22 :Agni, fiery ruler and generous lord of enlightenment, save us from sin, protect us from the sinful and the destroyers. Lord eternal and unaging, with your blazing law, justice and discipline, burn out evil, evil deeds and evil doers. (Rg. 7-15-13) 
23 :Agni, leading light of knowledge and power, generous creator and giver, yoke those motive powers of yours to the chariot which are best and fastest and which transport you to the destination of your love and passion gracefully without fail. (Rg. 6-16-43) 
24 :Agni, loving and accessible protector and ruler of the people, brilliant and generous chief of heroic brave, universally honoured and invoked, we love and enshrine you in our heart and home with faith and reverence. (Rg. 7-15-7) 
25 :This A gni is the highest lord and master of all on top of heaven and earth and gives energy and sustenance to the seeds of life in the waters of the universe. (Rg. 8- 44-16) 
26 :Agni, eternal lord omniscient, this divine knowledge, blissful, sweet and musical in Gayatri and other musical metres, ever new and giver of new ideas, pray reveal it to the sages and whisper it into our soul. (Rg. 1-27-4) 
27 :Agni, light of the world, dear as breath of life, all purifier, whom the poet visionary of light and theWord celebrates, pray listen to our invocation and song of adoration. (Rg. 8-74-11) 
28 :Agni, lord of food, energy and the dynamics of life and society, commanding a full poetic vision of corporate life, comprehends the gifts and oblations of the holy fire of the nation, bearing the jewels of life's wealth for the generous giver. (Rg. 4-15-3) 
29 :The rays of the sun (like banners of a mighty monarch) carry the brilliance of light, revealing the omnipresence of the omniscient Lord Supreme of the universe. (Rg. 1-50-1) 
30 :In the holy acts of yajna, light, serve and adore Agni, brilliant creator of new things of beauty, prosperity and joy, illuminator and observer of the eternal laws, generous giver, and destroyer of evil and disease. (Rg. 1-12-7) 
31 :Sam no devir abhistaye sam no bhavantu pltaye. Sam yor abhi sravantu nah. M ay the divine waters be for our peace and bliss for body, mind and soul and bring us showers of peace, protection and blessedness. (Rg. 10-9-4) 
32 :In every yajnic programme of your creative and constructive work, in every word of our voice, join and let us honour, appraise and develop agni, imperishable energy pervasive in all things of existence, and adore Agni, omniscient and omnipresent lord giver of knowledge and enlightenment. (Rg. 6-48-1) 
33 :Agni, save us by the first voice, and by the second, by three voices, and, 0 lord of cosmic power, ultimate haven and home of existence, save and promote us by the four. (Rg. 8-60-9) 
34 :(This is a very simple and yet a most comprehensive verse. The first voice could be the voice of average humanity; second, words of the sages; third, voice of the soul; fourth, the voice of divinity. Another way to understand: One, two, three or all the four Veda's voice. Yet another: voice of the soul in the rising sequence of the four matras of A urn as descri bed i n the Upanishads. And then the four stages of language in the descending order from divine to the human: Para, pashyanti, madhyama and Vaikhari) 
35 :Agni, ruling light of the world, invoked with reverence and adored, let those brave leaders and emi nent scholars commandi ng wealth and power be dear and closer to you who move forward, and lead, control and protect the defenders and promoters of the people, lands and cows. (Rg. 7-16-7) 
36 :Agni, universally adored, master ruler and protector of the people, scourge of the selfish and wicked, refulgent and generous, supreme protective presence of the home, who never neglect or forsake the inmates, you are great protector of happiness and heavens too, and abide in the heart and home of humanity. (Rg. 8-60-19) 
37 :Agni, lord of life, blazing as the sun, immortal, omniscient of things born, for the man of charity who has surrendered himself to you, you bring today wonderful wealth of the dawn, and, with yogis and blessings of nature, awake at the dawn. (Rg. 1-44-1) 
38 :shelter and security of the home, with protection and advancement, inspire and raise our means and materials for success and achievement. 0 lord of knowledge and vision, you are the guide and pilot of the chariot and wealth and honours of this generation. Give us the message and inspiration of peace, progress and security for our children. (Rg. 6-48-9) 
39 :Agni, you are infinitely expansive, boundless, all saviour, eternally right poet of cosmic rectitude, omniscient creator. Self-refulgent ever, light of the universe, the wise sages and masters of law and right action glorify you as the Lord Supreme. (Rg. 8-60-5) 
40 :Agni, saviour and purifier of life, closest and friendly, giveuswealth which is admirable and leadsto progress in food, health and age and cattle wealth. Give us the way of life leading to universally loved wealth, Like bowls of honey, let our prime songs of adoration reach this Agni who, blissful high priest of existence, gives all the wealths and joys of the world to humanity. (Rg. 8-103-6) 
41 :You pervade in the forests and in the earth upto heaven. The mortals light and raise you holily, and, without sloth or delay, you carry the sacred offerings of the devoted celebrants to the divinities over earth and heaven and shine among them. (Rg. 8-60-15) 
42 :There is seen the light of Agni, best knower of the ways of life, where people concentrate their vows of piety and discipline. Let our songs of adoration rise and reach Agni, self-revealed, who opens the paths of progress and urges us on to reach the goal of rectitude for noble people. (Rg. 8-103-1) 
43 :I n the yajna of love and non-violence,Agni, prime light of life, is the first adorable, then the holy fire, the priest, the soma stone and the holy grass are cherished. Therefore with the chants of Rks, I invoke the M aruts, cosmic energies, Brahmanaspati, giver of the Veda and the vedic scholar, and other venerable divinities for protection and promotion of our choice. (Rg. 8-27-1) 
44 :Pray to Agni of bright flames with songs and praise for protection and progress. 0 generous scholar, study and serveAgni for wealth, famous among people, Agni who provides home and happiness for the man of brilliance. (Rg. 8-71-14) 
45 :crackle of the blazing fIames of fire within. Come M itra, friends of humanity, comeAryama, powers of justice, come moving travelers, to the house of yajna, join the sacred cause of love and non-violence and sit on the holy grass around the vedi-fire. (Rg. 1-44-13) 
46 :Agni, the sun, lover of holy admirers, sitting as if on top of heaven in glory, turns his rays of light in circuit to the mother earth for her children. (Rg. 8-103-2) 
47 :Agni, lord and lover of light and knowledge, giver of light and knowledge, when you go to the waters, vibrant mother sources of light and energy, that going away is not to be endured, nor to be forgotten or negl ected, because w hi I e you are away, you are sti 11 near at hand with your light. Hence I have the best that is worthy of love and value from you. (Rg. 3-9-2) 
48 :Agni, lord of universal light and power, I, M anu, man of thought and intelligence, enlightened in truth and divine Law, consecrated in thejoy of piety, hold on to you in the heart. Shine, eternal light, in the heart of Kanva, man of knowledge, for the sake of humanity. The devotees bow to you in obedience and obeisance. (Rg. 1-36-19) 
49 :Agni, self-refulgent lord giver of wealth, honour and excellence, loves to have your fire of yajnic action sprinkled with overflowing ladle of ghrta and the highest refined action. Serve him closely, feed the fire to the full, let the flames rise, and the generous lord refulgent would lead you to the heights of prosperity and excellence. (Rg. 7-16-11) 
50 :M ay the lord of divine knowledge move forward. May the lady scholar of divine truth and law move forward. M ay the generous and brilliant men of yajna carry and conduct our yajnas of the achievement of manly heroes for five-fold gifts of wealth and wellbeing. (Rg. 1-40-3) 
51 :Agni, lord of light and life, brilliant as the sun, stay high with grace in glory for our protection and progress. Rise high as the hero of life's battles of honour and prosperity. It is for the reason of your glory and generosity that we invoke and pray to you alongwith the scholars with holy offers of yajna and celebration. (Rg. 1-36-13) 
52 :adore Agni, Lord and light of the universe, whom other devotees too adore in many ways, and we pray to the lord of light and power and instant action, worthy of the love and devotion of many peoplefarand wide who are seekers of divine knowledge and bliss for themselves. (Rg. 1-36-1) 
53 :Agni, the ruler, rules strength and power, heroes and warriors of the world, rules the greatness and grandeur of good fortune, rules the wealth of nations, rules the families blest with children of noble character, rules the master of cows, land, and knowledge and language, and rules and controls those who destroy the darkness of ignorance and hoarders of wealth. (Rg. 3- 16-1) 
54 :Agni, fiery and enlightened ruling power of nature and humanity, you are the protective and promotive head of the family and the home land. You are the receiver and giver of every thing in the loving and non-violent business of the nation's governance and administration. You are the purifier, sanctifier and giver of enlightenment universally adored. You organise, accomplish and pervade the yajnic business of life and living together by choice and common will. (Rg. 7-16-5) 
55 :Agni, lord of brilliance, friends we are, human, mortals all. We choose you as our guide and leader for the sake of protection and victory. You are immortal, imperishable in the flow of existence and the flux of karma, treasure home of good fortune, auspicious flame of inspiration, faster than light and free from sin and violence. (Rg. 3-9-1) 
56 :Honour and adore Agni with havi, adorn embellish and develop this power of yajna, establish this chief of yajna and presiding spirit of the home in place, and serve this receiver and giver of the gifts of yajna on the vedi with humble submission as the most honoured member of the family. Wondrous is the invigorating and sustaining power of the newly risen youthful Agni which never goes to its parental source for food and energy replenishment. A nd if you say that the udderless creator has given it birth, even so, going on its great ambassadorial mission, it carries the fragrant message of yajna to the divinities immediately on its birth. (Rg. 10-115-1) 
57 :I dam ta ekam para u ta ekam trtiyena jyotisa sam visasva. Samvesanastanve caruredhipriyo devanam parame janitre. This (body, this life time) is one mode of your existence. The one next (mind and karma) is another such. By thethird (spiritual and meditative life), 0 man, join you with life eternal. On merging of thesoul, happy and darling of the divinities, be free in the presence of the supreme creator of the world. (Rg. 10-56-1) 
58 :Another interpretation is that one manifestation of Agni is as fire on the earth, the second is as vayu or electric energy in the middle region, and the third is as light in the solar region. Imam stomamarhate jatavedase ratham iva sain mahema manisaya. Bhadra hi nah pramatir asya sam sadyagne sakhye ma risamd vayam tava. This song of celebration and worship in honour of venerableJ ataveda, A gni, omni present in the created world and lord omniscient, wesing in praise of hisglory with our mind and soul in sincerity and offer it to him as a joyous holiday chariot fit for his majesty. Blessed isourmind in hiscompany, whilewesitintheassembly of devotees. Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may we never come to suffering while we enjoy your company and friendship. (Rg. 1-94-1) 
59 :The divinities of nature and humanity light the sacred fire: supreme light of heaven, vital fire of life of the earth, Vaishvanara, leader and energiser of the world, born of cosmic law and the fire of cosmic yajna. It is the visionary, even the revolutionary, poet, ruler of the world, sacred as a chance visitor, voice of the people, sustainer of life and its order. (Rg. 6-7-1) 
60 :Agni, lord of beneficence sung and celebrated in hymns of holiness, just as warriors rush to battle for victory, so do joyous holy yajakas and celebrants eager for karmic action and life's victory hasten to you with homage and yajnas performed with these hymns of praise and songs of adoration, and then, just as rain showers pour from the heights of clouds and streams flow down from the top of mountains, so do fruits of piety and gifts of divine grace shower down and flow, from you. (Rg. 6-24-6) 
61 :AII ye people of the land, before the unexpected and inconceivable thunder and lightning, light the fire and, for the protection and advancement of your peaceful, non-violent yajnic social order in the midst of heaven and earth, appoint the golden gloried ruler, a very Rudra, saviour of the good, a terror for the evil, hota, a yajaka and not a grabber or hoarder, but one inviolably dedicated to truth and Dharma. (Rg. 4-3-1) 
62 :The spirit of life, Agni, which the ruling leader challenging the battle of life kindles with faith, reverence and fragrant oblations, feeding its physical symbol, the yajnic fire, with ghrta, honour and dignity of Iife, the Ieading lights of the nation take over, augment itand celebrate it with the best offers of yajna, and then, just as the light of the sun earlier obstructed by nightly darkness rises and shines with the dawns in advance of the day, so does the spi rit of the nati on earl i er suppressed Agni, mighty abundant power and presence, goes forward with lofty lightning force and banner roaring over heaven and earth. It goes to the very heights and bounds of heaven in all directions and sub-directions and pervades in the middle regions in the depth of vapours and the mighty one grows mightier there at the heart of clouds. (Rg. 10-8-1) 
63 :Agni is seen and known while rising by the burning samidhas lighted by theyajakasatdawn coming up like a cow early in the morning, and the flames, like branches of a mighty tree, rise brilliantly and touch the sky where there is no pain, no darkness. (Rg. 5-1-1) 
64 :Earnest men of love, passion and faith, but, being human, limited in intelligence, hold at heart, worship and serve Agni pervading and dominating the world of existence, great, sustainer of the vibrant wise, all knowing and wise, breaker of the strongholds of negativity and darkness, the original seed and source of life, beatific, supremely intelligent, golden flamed and divinely adorable. M en hold at heart, worship and serve this omnipresent Agni being more dynamic than the dynamics of nature, the instant presence that it is. (Rg. 10-46-5) 
65 :Sukram te anyad yajatam te anyad visurupe ahanl dyaur ivasi. Visvd hi maya avasi svadhavan bhadra te pusann iha ratir astu. Agni, lord of heaven and earth, give us, we pray, the abundance of mother earth which overflows with possibilities of action and achievement. Give us liberal gifts of cows and the universal form of speech and knowledge and lasting wealth. M ake it possible for the performer of yajna. Bless us with brave and heroic children and grand children. Bless us with the favour of your kindness and benevolence under your benign eye. (Rg. 3-6-11) 
66 :High priest of the cosmic yajna of creation, universally self-manifested, great and glorious, pervasive in space and things even beyond the senses, abiding in the heart and soul of humanity, Agni rolls at the heart of the dynamics of existence. 0 man, the omnipresent light of the universe which holds, controls and sustains everything is celebrated in the Vedas and worshipped at heart. It is Agni, sustainer of the individual body and the cosmic form, ruler and controller of everything, that bears and brings you all food and energies and blesses you with all wealth, honour and excellence of life. (Rg. 10-46-1) 
67 :Let us speak in honour of the universal Vaishvanara, leading artist and light of the world: I honour and celebrate the glory of the self-refulgent, generous, virile, beloved hero of the nations like Indra of mighty exploits, the sun, joy of the world. (Rg. 7-6-1) 
68 :Agni, immanent in everything in existence, it is hidden in the two arani woods (the lower base and the upper churner), like the embryo neatly nestled in the womb of pregnant mothers. Agni is worthy of love and reverence, and it ought to be generated by people who are alert and awake and possess the right inputs and apparatuses in plenty. (Rg. 3-29-2) 
69 :Sanad ague mpiasi yatudhanan na tv a raksdmsi pranasu jigyuh. Anu daha sahamuran kayado ma te hetyd muksata daivyayah. Agni, you destroy the oppressors since time immorial. Never can the evil dominate over you in their battles against the good. Let the flesh eaters alongwith the cruel and wicked be destroyed, and may they never escape the stri ke of your divine punishment and natural retribution. (Rg. 10-87-19) 
70 :Agni, irresistible power of motion and advancement for the aspi rants, bri ng us the most bri 11 i ant honour and excellence of life. Bless us with abundant wealth, open the path of progress and guide us on the way. (Rg. 5-10-1) 
71 :If a person is brave and zealous, lights the fire, then offers havi into the vedi with surrender, the mortal would have the lasting gift of divine peace and prosperity. Shining bright and rising high, your flames and fragrance reach unto the height of heaven. 0 pure and purifying fire, with light and splendour you shine like the sun. (Rg. 6-2-6) 
72 :Agni, leading light of life, like an inmate of our earthly home, like a friend for sure you protect, promote and sustain our honour and excellence. 0 watchful observer of all, our haven and home, you preserve and advance our food and energy, honour and fame, like our body's vitality. (Rg. 6-2-1) 
73 :Let Agni, beloved of all people, freely roaming around as a visitor, be welcomed and honoured early morning, immortal power into which all the mortals, people of the world, offer homage of fragrant havi. (Rg. 5-18-1) 
74 :The fastest transport, fastest communication, lightning adoration is for A gni, lord of light and power. Shine high and wide and intense, blazing power, and as all greatness and grandeur flows from you, so do all wealth, all energy and all victories flow from you. (Rg. 5 - 25 - 7 ) 
75 :For heat and light, energy and power, and for vision and excellence in life, study, develop and revere that mighty inexhausti bleA gni with vast and rich inputs, which, like a friend, people have lighted and instituted as a prime and divine power with high praise and celebrations since the earliest times. (Rg. 5-16-1) 
76 :Let us rise and reach A gni, highest divinity, greatest destroyer of evil and darkness and friend of humanity, which shines with mighty blaze in the universal sun in the midst of the stars. (Rg. 8-74-4) 
77 :Manifested in existence by supreme law of D harma, coexi stent with its highest concomitant natural powers, Agni, father protector of the soul and pranic energy, omniscient visionary and law giver, emerges in human consciousness from Shraddha, inviolable faith, which is the genitor of divine consciousness. We invoke adore brilliant Soma, Varuna, exhilarating spirit of peace and justice for protection and progress, Agni, spirit of light and warmth of life, with holy words and songs of devotion. We invoke and adore the Adityas, brilliant powers of enlightenment, Vishnu, lord omniscient and omnipresent awareness, Surya, self-refulgent divine source of light, Brahma, Divine and the sage of divinity, and Brhaspati, Lord Infinite and the scholar visionary of divinity. (Rg. 10- 141-3) 
78 :Just as winners of the earth march forward by paths of freedom so do these adventurers of the spirit rise from here by stages to the heights of heaven and Agni, divinity self-refulgent and omnificent, we ki ndle the yaj na f i re together for the gift of great wealth, power and excellence. 0 generous lord of showers, pray inspire, energise and fertilise heaven and earth with abundance of food and energy so that we may continue the yajnic process of creation and production. He holds and controls the waters of life, and He reveals the universal knowledge of existence, the Veda. And Heknowsthatworld of existence and comprehends the cosmic system and its working. Thus H e holds and controls its working just as the centre-hold of the wheel and the rim hold the structure and control the movement of the wheel. (Rg. 2-5-3) 
79 :Agni, universal spirit of light and fire, creator, protector and destroyer, refulgent ruler of nature, life and society, with your love and passion for life and goodness and with your wrath against evil, sabotage and negativity, seize, cripple and all round destroy the strength, vigour, valour and resistance of the negative and destructi ve forces of eviI and wickedness, I urki ng, working and persisting in nature, life and society. Save the good and destroy the demons. (Rg. 10-87-25) 
80 :A gni, lord of light and knowledge, sagely scholar of wisdom and piety, bring together into this yajna of love and non-violence the people, children of reflective humanity, who sprinkle the vedi with holy water and offer ghee into the fire. Bring together the celibate scholars of twenty four, thirty six and forty eight years discipline and perform yajna in honour of the Vasus, eight abodes of life in nature, Rudras, eleven vitalities of life, and Adityas, twelve phases of the yearly round of the sun. (Rg. 1-45-1) 
81 :Faithful and dedicated, giving in homage, I sing profusely in honour and celebration of you, and come in to you for shelter and protection, Agni, lord of light as the sun, great and glorious. (Rg. 1-150-1) 
82 :Agni, lord of the knowledge of existence, creator and ruler of food, energy and wealths of life and lord of cows and sunbeams, child of omnipotence, bring us the brilliance of knowledge and great splendour of life's victories. (Rg. 1-79-4) 
83 :Agni, in the yajna, creative programme of love and non-violence, you are the most adorable. B ring the devas, holy divinities, for the yajamana who loves to be with the divinities. You are the giver and performer, happy giver of happiness, over-shining and overwinning the stingy and selfish uncreators. (Rg. 3-10-7) 
84 :Seven measured motherly orders of existence at the material, pranic and psychic level join, reveal and celebrate Soma manifesting in beauty and glory, this constant unmoved mover who, being omnipresent and pervasive, knows of the wealth and sublimity of the universe. (Rg. 9-102-4) 
85 :M ay that beneficent intelligence of the light of divine M other N ature come to us day by day with her protective faculties, do us good and ward off errors, obstructions, negative values and misbeliefs. (Rg. 8- 18-7) 
86 :Study, celebrate and by yajna develop the fire divine, direct, immanent and omnipresent energy, versati I e pow er w hose smoke ri sesf reel y and w hose I i ght of flame no one comprehends, no one can obstruct. (Rg. 8-23-1) 
87 :Whoever offers homage to Agni with sacred oblations into the holy fire is safe, no mortal enemy even with the worst of his fraudulent power or sorcery can prevail over him or his home. (Rg. 8-23-15) 
88 :Agni, 0 divine leader, cast away that crooked thief, that strenuous enemy, far from the path of the aspirant. 0 protector and promoter of the good and the true, make it easy for him to follow the course simple and straight. (Rg. 6-51-13) 
89 :Mighty brave Agni, lord of the people, saving spirit of life, hearing my new song of praise and prayer, burn off the destructive wiles of the evil forces with your heat. (Rg. 8-23-14) 
90 :Agni, lord of universal love and friendship, he whose love and friendship, devotion and dedication, you accept i nto your ki nd care thrives under your protection and promotion and advances in life with noble and heroic progeny, moving from victory to glory. (Rg. 8- 19-30) 
91 :Praise the self-refulgent lord giver of heavenly bliss whom the divinities of light and enlightenment hold and reflect in all his glory, Agni, the lord adorable, all pervasive yet uninvolved, whom, for success and advancement, noble and learned people perceive, realise and worship as the one worthy of worship. (Rg. 8-19-1) 
92 :M ay this Agni, welcome as a venerable visitor, shelter home of the world, universally adored who is the noble giver and generous high priest of cosmic yajna, never feel displeased with us, may the lord give us fulfilment. (Rg. 8-103-12) 
93 :Lord of beauty and glory, may the yajna fire with offers of oblations be auspiciousfor us. M ay our charity be auspicious. May our yajna and all other acts of kindness and love free from violence be auspicious. And may all the appreciation and praise of our acts and behaviour be auspicious and fruitful. (Rg. 8-19-19) 
94 :We choose to worship you, A gni, most adorable, worthy of worship, self-refulgent lord over the divinities of existence, imperishable and eternal creator of the yajna of this universal order of the world. (Rg. 8-19-3) 
95 :Agni, lord of light and life, giveusthat splendour of spirit and intelligence which may challenge and overcome any voracious friend at the door, in the heart and home, and counter the wealth of any evil minded person anywhere in life. (Rg. 8-19-15) 
96 :When Agni, presiding spirit of human life, is animated, energised and sharpened by yajna, then, active in the human settlements, it counters and dispel sal I evil influences and forces of negativity. (Rg. 8-23-13) 
97 :In your soma yajna in the business of the world of the lord's creation, sing together songs of homage in honour of the universally adored, ever true and eternal almighty Indra, songs which may be as pleasing to the mighty lord as to the seeker and the celebrant. (Rg. 6- 45-22) 
98 :The psychic base of the devoted seeker of meditative communion is highly creative. 0 mind and senses attended with both knowledge and action of divine character, rise high and reach close to the reservoir of divine grace and win the showers of bliss. (Rg. 8-72-12) 
99 :The sage, having drunk of the soma of divine love, sings in praise of the dynamics of motion and attainment and the music overflows, he sings of the dynamics of creative production and power of communication such as waves of energy, earth and cows, and he sings profusely of the lord's refulgent forms of wealth, beauty and excellence. (Rg.8-92-25) 
100 :That Indra, dynamic and enlightened mind and intelligence, we cultivate and strengthen for the elimination of the great waste, deep ignorance and suffering prevailing in the world. M ay that light and mind be exuberant and generous for us with showers of enlightenment. (Rg. 8-93-7) 
101 :Ruling power, Indra, you have risen high by virtue of your strength, patient courage, and grandeur of personality. Generous as showers of blissful rain, you are mighty, excellent and refulgent as the sun. (Rg. 10- 153-2) 
102 :Yajna, joint creative endeavour which protects and replenishes the earth and environment, pleases and elevates Indra, the ruler, and creates a place of bliss in the light of heaven for the doer. (Rg. 8-14-5) 
103 :Indra, lord of universal knowledge, power and prosperity, if I were, likeyou, the sole master of wealth, wisdom and power in my field, then pray may my dependent and celebrant also be blest with wealth and wisdom of the world. (Let all of us together be blest with abundance of wealth and wisdom under the social dispensation of our system of government and administration.) (Rg.8-14-1) 
104 :(Indra is interpreted in this Sukta as the omnipotent, self-refulgent lord and light of theuniverse, as the sublime soul, and as the enlightened mind according to the context of meaning reflected by the intra-structure of the mantra.) 
105 :May Indra, that eternal lord omnipotent, that youthful ruler, and that forceful leader, be our friend and companion so that he may lead the man of instant decision and action and the hardworking people on way to wisdom and right living even from far off distance. (Rg. 6-45-1) 
106 :Indra, powerful friend and ally in spirit and conduct, let no force, howsoever strong it may be, from any direction come at night and overtake us by violence. With you as a friend and inspirer, let us counter that attack and win. (Rg. 8-92-31) 
107 :Indra, lord supreme of power and glory, bless us with the wealth of life and well-being that gives us the superiority of action over sufferance, delight and victory, courage and endurance, excellence and generosity, and leads us on way to progress under divine In battles great and small, we invoke Indra, lord omnipotent, we call upon sun and wind, mighty breaker of the clouds, friend in darkness, wielder of the thunderbolt. (Rg. 1-7-5) 
108 :In the thousand armed dynamic battles of the elements in evolution, Indra, as the sun, drinks the soma of the earth and therein shines the potent majesty of the lord. (Rg. 8-45-26) 
109 :settlement, peace and progress, we are your admirers, and we stand for you. 0 lord, know this of us, for us and for the nation. (Rg.7-31-4) 
110 :BI essed are they for sure w ho ki ndl e the f i re of yaj na, A gni, and spread the seats of grass open for al I i n faith and love and whose friend is Indra, the mighty youthful soul who brooks no nonsense and delay. (8-45-1) 
111 :Bhindhi visva apa dvisah pari badho jahi mrdhah. Vasu sparham tad a bhara. Break off all the jealous adversaries, remove all obstacles, eliminate the enemies and violence and fill the world with cherished wealth, honour and prosperity. (Rg. 8-45-40) 
112 :Whatever I hear here wherever I am, whatever the stimulation of the nerves and motions of the muscles in the hands, whatever people speak, whatever varied and wonderful they straighten, realise or obtain in the business of life, all that is by the motion of these winds. (Research into the energy, power and uses of the winds.) (Rg. 1-37-3) 
113 :Indra, these friends, celebrants of soma and holiness, holding offerings of precious homage, look and wait for you as the seeker waits for the sight of his wealth. (Rg. 8-45-16) 
114 :The people, in fact the entire humanity, bow in homage and surrender to this lord of passion, power and splendour just as rivers flow on down and join into the sea. (Rg. 8-6-4) 
115 :We choose for ourselves the grand patronage and protection of the generous brilliancies of nature and humanity for our safety, security and advancement. (Rg. 8-83-1) 
116 :B rahmanaspati, bri 11 i ant I ord of Vedi c know I edge, zealous for learning I am, born of learned parents, kindly take me up as a disciple, train me as an expert of soma- yajna, a scholar of language and communication with a vision of the Word and meaning, and as an artist and craftsman of eminence. (Rg. 1-18-1) 
117 :May Indra, lord of universal intelligence, destroyer of darkness, commander of universal success and joy, we pray, know our mind and listen to us for our heart's desire for success. (Rg. 8-93-18) 
118 :Where does the generous lord of showers, ever youthful and eternal, of broad shoulders unbent, reside? W hich sage and scholar can ever comprehend and serve him in full knowledge and competence? (Rg. 8-64-7) 
119 :In seclusion over mountain slopes and in the caves and on the confluence of rivers, the vibrant presence of the lord within reveals itself by illumination With songs of celebration glorify Indra, refulgent ruler of humanity, worthy of adoration, leader, destroyer of evil people, the greatest and most munificent. (Rg. 8-16-1) 
120 :Let Indra, the ruler, value, protect and promote the soma homage mixed and strengthened with the delicacies of life and offered by the generous and enl i ghtened peopl e. (T he mantra poi nts to the ci rcul ati on of wealth and economy of the nation managed by the tax payers and the ruling powers of the government.) (Rg. 8-92-4) 
121 :Indra, lord ruler of the world and guardian of the people, just as mother cows look toward and low out of affection for the calf, so do these people look up to you with love and reverence, and their voices of adoration exalt you, 0 lord of a hundred acts of kindness and holiness. (Rg. 6-45-25) 
122 :J ust as here on the surface of the earth and in its environment, we know, there is the beautiful light of the sun penetrating and reaching everywhere, similarly, let all know, it is there on the surface of the moon. (Just as the sun holds and illuminates the earth and themoon, so should the ruler with his light of justice and power hold and brighten every home in the land.) (Rg. 1-84-15) 
123 :When most generous Indra moves and brings about heavy showers of rain, then Pusha too is the corporate power of natural energy. (Thus making and breaking, consumption and creation are simultaneous processes of natural metabolism in life.) (Rg. 6-57-4) 
124 :The cow, the earth, nature herself, mother of magnanimous Maruts, mighty men, is committed to provide sustenance and honourable existence for them and, joined with them in piety, bearing lovely gifts for them, provides the food of life and love as a mother suckles her children. (Rg. 8-94-1) 
125 :Cherished and lovely offers of havi offered into the fire in the yajna of life exalt Indra, and with light and lustre lead the yajamana to the sanctifying bath on the completion of the yajna. (Rg. 8-93-23) 
126 :I have received from my father super intelligence of the universal mind and law, I have realise it too in the soul, and I feel reborn like the refulgent sun. (Rg. 8-6-10) 
127 :May our people, wives and children be rich in wealth, knowledge and grace of culture, so that we, abundant and prosperous, may rejoice with them and live with them in happy homes in a state of honour and glory. (Rg. 1-30-13) 
128 :M ay Soma and Pusha, divine spirit of peace and creativity, growth and sustenance, both adorable, gracious and all pervasive, inspire and enlighten all people of the world. Sing in praise and appreciation of I ndra, the ruler, protector of your food, sustenance and maintenance, all tolerant, all defender and all challenger, hero of a hundred noble actions and the best, most generous and most brilliant of the people. (Rg. 8-92-1) 
129 :Indra, we too have the same aims and objectives asyou. Weareyourfriendsand admirers. Weknow and wish to achieve, and with all words of praise and appreciation, we adore you as others, wise devotees, do. (Rg. 8-2-16) 
130 :Let all ourvoicesof admiration flow and intensify the soma for the joy of Indra, and let the poets sing songs of adoration for him and celebrate his achievements. (Rg. 8-92-19) 
131 :grass of yajnavedi, is dedicated to you. Come fast, you would love it, drink and enjoy, and protect and promote it for the good of all. (Rg. 8-17-11) 
132 :Just as the generous mother cow is milked for the person in need of nourishment, so every day for the sake of light and knowledge we invoke and worship Indra, lord omnipotent of light and life, maker of beautiful forms of existence and giver of protection and progress. (Rg. 1-4-1) 
133 :cprm -gfr w Tpnfir mi nil i Him ii Lord of generous and creative power, when the yajna is on and soma is distilled, I prepare the cup and offer you the drink. Pray accept, drink to your heart's content and enjoy the ecstasy of bliss divine. (Rg. 8- 45-22) 
134 :Indra, of the soma which is distilled and poured in the cups and ladles of spiritual yajna for you, drink to your heart's desire since you yourself rule over the ecstasy of the nectar. (Rg. 8-82-7) 
135 :Friends together and friends of Indra ever stronger and mightier, in every act of production and progress and in every battle for protection and preservation, we call upon Indra for defence and victory for well-being. (Rg. 1-30-7) 
136 :Friends and celebrants of song divine, come, sit together and join to meditate (on life, divinity, humanity, science and spirituality, and freedom), and sing in thankful praise of I ndra, lord of life and energy. (Rg. 1- 5-1) 
137 :Indra is great, supreme and transcendent, self- refulgent like the sun, extensive like space and more. M ay all the power and grandeur be for the lord of justice and the thunderbolt. M ay all be dedicated to Him. (Rg. 1-8-5) 
138 :A tu na indra ksumantam citrarh grabham sain grbhaya. Mahahasti daksinena. right hand abundant riches for us which may be full of nourishment, energy, wonderful beauty and grace worth having as a prize possession. (Rg. 8-81-1) 
139 :To the best of your knowledge and culture and with the best of your language, worship and adore I ndra, protector of stars and planets, lands and cows, language and culture, creator of the dynamics of existence and protector of its constancy. (Rg. 8-69-4) 
140 :When would the Lord, sublime and wondrous, ever greater, ever friendly, shine in our consciousness and bless us? With what gifts of protection and promotion? What highest favour of our choice? What order of grace? (Rg. 4-31-1) 
141 :May I realise, I pray, and attain to the direct presence of the Lord of the Universe, wondrous darling love of the soul, with gifts of the divine and discriminative vision of meditative intelligence. (Rg. 1-18-6) 
142 :Indra let all the pathways below the regions of light by which you ignite, initiate and radiate currents of energy in the firmament be known to us, and Iet the people all regions of the world listen to our voice. Indra, lord of infinite actions of grace, when you are kind to us and bless us with joy and well being, you give us food, energy, knowledge and enlightenment so that we may rise towards perfection as good human beings. (Rg. 8-93-28) 
143 :Active, expressive and eloquent people, conscious of their rights and duties, serve and abide by the ruling power of the system, Indra, as it arises and advances, and while they do so they enjoy good health, honour and prosperity of life for themselves and their progeny. (Rg. 10-153-1) 
144 :highpriest, when the night is come, sing of Savita, adore the light of life. This glorious dawn, darling of the sun, shines forth from heaven and proclaims the day. Ashvins, harbingers of this glory, I admire you immensely - infinitely. (Rg. 1-46-1) 
145 :Indra, lord of light and space, unchallenged and unchallengeable, wields the thunderbolt and, with weapons of winds, light and thunder, breaks the clouds of ninety-nine orders of water and electricity for the sake of humanity and the earth. (Rg. 1-84-13) 
146 :Indra, lord of light and life, come with all the soma-celebrations of food, energy and joy, great as you are with majesty, power and splendour omnipresent, and give us the ecstasy of living with enlightenment. (Rg. 1-9-1) 
147 :A tu na indra vrtrahannasmdkam ardham a gahi. Mahan mahibhir utibhih. Indra, lord and ruler of the world, mighty destroyer of darkness and evil, come with all great powers and protections, join and guide our progress. (Rg. 4-32-1) 
148 :Indra, lord almighty, pervades and envelops both heaven and earth in the cover of light, the light that shines is only the lord's divine splendour that blazes with glory. (Rg. 8-6-5) 
149 :Indra, light and power of existence, this creation is yours for sure. J ust as a pigeon flies into the nest to meet its mate so do you pervade and impregnate nature to create the world of forms, and listen to our words of praise and prayer. (Rg. 1-30-4) 
150 :May the wind of life energy blow for us as harbinger of sanatives, good health and peace for our heart and help us to live a full life beyond all suffering and ailment. (Rg. 10-186-1) 
151 :The man whom Prachetas, men of knowledge and wisdom, Varuna, distinguished and meritorious man, M itra, friend of all, Aryama, man of justice, all these protect and advance (is really strong). Can he ever be hurt, bullied or suppressed? No! (Rg. 1-41-1) 
152 :Lord greatest of the great, Indra, come now as ever before and bring us wealth of lands and cows and discipline of the mind and senses, wealth of horses, progress and meaningful attainments, and scientific transports and spiritual adventures of the soul in meditation and yajnic sessions. (Rg. 8-46-10) 
153 :I ndra, these spotted cows of yours, various earths, starry skies which yield and shower honey sweets of milk and life giving soma are augmenters of the divine yajna of universal evolution. (Rg. 8-6-19) 
154 :Indra, 0 higher mind, 0 soul, 0 awareness of divinity, who are adored by many, celebrated by many many names in many ways, arise in every person in every soma yajna by with virtue of this intelligence, this knowledge and this awareness which nature has given to every person. (Rg. 8-93-17) 
155 :M ay Sarasvati, goddess of divine speech, mother knowledge of arts, science and divinity, come with gifts of food for the mind and intellect and purify us with the light of knowledge. M ay the mother grace our yajna of arts and sciences and bless us with the light divine. (Rg. 1-3-10) 
156 :Who in this bounden humanity can regale and surfeit this Indra with the soma of surrender and adoration? N one. M ay the lord of boundless abundance bring us wealth, honour and excellence of life. A yahi susuma hi ta indra somam piba imam. Edam barhih sado mama. Indra, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, we hold the yajna and distil the soma of life in your service. Come, grace this holy seat of my yajna dedicated to you, watch my performance, enjoy the soma, and protect and promote the yajna for the beauty and joy of life. (Rg. 8-17-1) 
157 :M ay the great, refulgent and inviolable protection and promotion of the three, M itra, VarunaandAryaman bless the life of nature and humanity. (M itra, Varuna and Aryaman are explained as prana, apana and heart energy, and as the sun of the summer, winter and spring seasons round the year.) (Rg. 10-185-1) 
158 :Indra, shelter home of the world, leader of humanity, presiding over mutually sustained stars and planets in motion, we are in bond with you and so shall we remain. (Rg. 8-46-1) 
159 :Indra, lord almighty, commander, controller and inspirer of clouds, mountains and great men of generosity, may our hymns of adoration win your pleasure. Pray create and provide means and methods of sustenance and progress in life, and castoff jealousies and enmities against divinity, knowledge and prayer, our bond between human and divine. (Rg. 8-64-1) 
160 :Indra, lord of honour, excellence and majesty, honoured by songs of celebration, served and pleased with streams of sweet soma in homage, pray protect and promote our soma-yajna of life and endeavour. By you alone is acknowledged the honour, joy and value of life and karma. (Rg. 3-40-6) 
161 :Sada va indras carkrsada upo nu sa saparyan. Na devo vrtah sura indrah. Indra, the lord omnipotent, always draws you close to himself, caring for you. Indra, refulgent, brave and generous, is ever free, never bound. AII the flows of soma, joys, beauties and graces of life concentrate in you, and thence they flow forth too, Indra, lord supreme, just as all rivers flow and join in the ocean and flow forth from there. 0 lord no one can comprehend and excel you. (Rg. 8-92-22) 
162 :The singers of Vedic hymns worship Indra, infinite lord of the expansive universe, Indra, the sun, lord of light, Indra, vayu, maruts, currents of energy, and Indra, the universal divine voice, with prayers, mantras, actions and scientific research. (Rg. 1-7-1) 
163 :Forfood, energy and knowledge, may Indra, lord of creativity, imagination and power, give us wealth, honour and excellence of broad, versatile and expert nature. May the lord of speed and victory grant us sustenance, energy and advanced success in our pursuit of progress. (Rg. 8-93-34) 
164 :Indra, light of life, dear as breath of vitality, mighty great, blazing as the sun which is stable in its orbit and enlightens and watches us all as it moves, may, we pray, remove all fear and give us freedom. (Rg. 2-41-10) 
165 :adorable, reach you, in every yajna, in every cycle of creation, like cows rushing to the calf with love. (Rg. 6-45-28) 
166 :We always invoke and call upon Indra, lord commander of power, honour and excellence, and Pusha, giver of nourishment energy and intelligence, for the sake of friendship and all round joy and well being and for the achievement of success and victory in the battles of life. (Rg. 6-57-1) 
167 :Indra, lord ruler of the world, destroyer of evil and breaker of the cloud like the sun, there is none higher than you, none beyond, none greater, none even equal to you as you are. (Rg. 4-30-1) 
168 :I constantly praise the lord saviour of you, people, and the protector of your earthly wealth, power, progress and freedom. (Rg. 8-45-28) 
169 :Indra, lord of light and splendour, the songs of divinity reveal and manifest you in your glory, protector of the universe and generous rain-giver of favours and kindness. And I too, in response, celebrate your magnificence and magnanimity without satiety. (Rg. 1-9-4) 
170 :True it is that that man is morally right, well guided and secure whom the M aruts, vibrant powers of defence and protection, Aryama, power of right conduct and justice, and M itra, power of love and enlightenment, all free from hate and jealousy, lead and protect on the right path. (Rg. 8-46-4) 
171 :Whatever wanted wealth hidden in solid mountains, concealed in secret and trustworthy sources or covered in caverns and deep in the clouds, bring that out in the open for the society. (Rg. 8-45-41) 
172 :Indra, lord of boundless power and holy action, under your kind care and protection, let us reach close enough to your adorabl e presence and your divi ne glory in song and deep meditation. Indra, lord of wealth, honour and excellence, accept and enjoy in the morning our gift of homage and yajna mixed with roasted rice and curds and sanctified and offered with the chant of holy words. (Rg. 3-52-1) 
173 :When you fight out the adversaries of life and humanity, you crush the head of the demon of drought and famine with the sea mist and the cloud. (Rg. 8-14-13) 
174 :Ime ta indra somah sutaso ye ca sotvah. Tesam matsva prabhuvaso. extracted and matured are all for you. Eternal lord of infinitewealth and excellence, acceptthese, begracious, and bless us. J ust as strong winds carry the cloud for rain on the earth, j ust as men di g the wel I for i rri gati ng the f i el d, so you serve Indra, most generous and powerful hero of a hundred acts of creation and growth, with each drop of your powers and energies. (Rg. 1-30-1) 
175 :And from here, Indra, come to us, bring us the food of life for a hundredfold and a thousandfold victory of honour and excellence. (Rg. 8-92-10) 
176 :When the mighty soul, destroyer of evil, born to self consciousness, takes to the bow and arrow, blazing, fearsome, breaker of foes, he asks the mother, spirit of higher vision and discrimination: Who are the enemies renowned to be terrible and irresistible? (Rg. 8-45-4) 
177 :We invoke the lord divine and master ruler who is highly adorable, of long and supple arms of generosity, and always does good for the protection and promotion of all. (Rg. 8-32-10) 
178 :May God, Lord Omniscient, Varuna, lord of justice and worthy of our intelligent choice, M itra, lord of universal friendship, and the man of knowledge, wisdom and divine vision bless us with a natural simple and honest way of living. M ay Aryama, lord of justice and dispensation, bless us with a straight way of living without pretence. M ay He, lord of love who loves us and whom we love bless us with the company of noble, generous and brilliant people in humanity, and may He grant us the benefit of such generous powers of nature. (Rg. 1-90-1) 
179 :The bright red dawn from far off, which yet appears so close, wraps the world in crimson glory and then spreads it over with the light of the sun. (Rg. 8-5-1) 
180 :M ay M itra and Varuna, sun and shower, heat and cold, fire and water, and friends of the nation inspired with j usti ce and rectitude, ferti Iise and energise our Iands and environment with waters and yajnic enrichments, protect and promote our cows and other cattle wealth, develop our milk products, and make the earth flow with streams of milk and honey. M ay all these powers do good to humanity, our lands and our homes. (Rg. 3-62-16) 
181 :Those children of space, the winds, in their motions, carry and expand the waves of sound and the currents of waters and other energies across the dynamics of space so that they reach their destinations like the mother cows hastening on their legs to their stal ls.(R g. 1-37-10) 
182 :Vishnu created this threefold universe of matter, motion and mind in three steps of evolution through Prakriti, subtle elements and gross elements, shaped the atoms i nto form and fixed the form i n eternal space and time. (Rg. 1-22-17) 
183 :Indra, lord of life, ignore the man who offers yajnic soma in a mood of anger, frustration and protest. Ignore the man who offers yajna and soma but in a joyless and conflictive mood. Accept this soma of homage distilled and offered in a state of delight, love and faith. (Rg. 8-32-21) 
184 :Howsoever little, insignificanttheword of prayer and adoration offered in honour of omniscient, omnipotent, self-refulgent Indra, that is the exaltation of Indra, elevation of the celebrant too. to divinity in faith and opposed to doubt and disloyalty knows the words of praise spoken by a man of doubtful faith as much as he knows the songs of adoration sung by a man of faith (and makes a distinction between the two). (Rg. 8-2-14) 
185 :Indra, happiest and most exalted by songs of adoration, lord of all strength, power, victories and the victorious, commander of all world forces, isthefriend of joyous soma celebrants of peace and prosperity. Come along with us with all your strength and enthusiasm without hesitation or embarrassment, and go forward like a great hero inspired by a youthful maiden. (Rg. 8-2-19) 
186 :Indra, pranic energy of air, according to the seasons drink the soma juices of nature from the earthly treasuries created by the Supreme Lord of the universe. The vital relation of life with you is universal and inviolable. (Rg. 1-15-5) 
187 :Indra, lord celebrated in song, your devoted celebrants as we are, 0 lord protector and promoter of the beauty, honour and excellence of life, pray give us the food and fulfilment of life we love and aspire for. (Rg. 8-32-7) 
188 :Indra, lustrous lord always victorious in battles, in all the battles of life we face, vest manly strength in our bodies and courage in our hearts. You love and honour the brave, you are brave yourself, you are definite in intention and undisturbed in attitudes. You are now ripe for the perfection of mind to experience the soul's beatitude in, divine presence. (Rg. 8-92-28) 
189 :I ndra, lord of power and advancement, you alone we invoke and call upon for acquisition of food, energy, honour, excellence and progress. All of us, leading people, makers, poets, artists, artisans and architects of the nation, fast advancing in all directions, invoke and exhort you, protector and promoter of universal truth and values in human struggles for light, goodness and generosity, and the wealth of life. (Rg. 6-46-1) 
190 :To the best of your intention and purpose and for whatever you wish to achieve, pray to Indra, lord of glory, world power and promotion and means of success, who gives a thousandfold wealth, honour and excellence to his celebrants. (Rg. 8-49-1) 
191 :We invoke and call upon Indra eagerly as cows call for their calves in the stalls, and with songs of adoration over night and day we glorify him, lord glorious, omnipotent power fighting for truth against evil forces, and exhilarated with the bright soma of worship offered by celebrant humanity. (Rg. 8-88-1) 
192 :In the yajna of love and non-violence where everything is perfect and soma is distil led, I invoke I ndra like Abundance itself, giver of wealth, honour and fulfilment. Singing songs of adoration with energy and enthusi asm for your protecti on and progress, 0 devotees, celebrate I ndra who bri ngs wealth, honour and excel lence at the earliest by fastest means. (Rg. 8-66-1) 
193 :Only the saviour, a person of dynamic will and action joined in the soul with a controlled and dedicated mind, would share wealth and knowledge with the people and distribute it over the deserving. With words of prayer I bow to Indra, the ruler invoked by you all and draw his attention to you just like the carpenter bending flexiblewood round asfelly of thewheel. (The lord is flexible too, his heart melts with sympathy for the people.) (Rg. 7-32-20) 
194 :Piba sutasya rasino matsva na indra gomatah. Apir no bodhi sadhamadye vrdhe smart avantu te dhiyah. Indra, resplendent and mighty, karma yogi, great performer, come and have a drink of our delicious festive soma distilled and mixed with milk and cream, share the ecstasy, enlighten us, your own people, for progress and prosperity, and may your thoughts and wisdom protect, promote and guide us in life. (Rg. 8-3-1) 
195 :Come to give gifts of wealth and honour to the devotee so that the people may be happy and prosperous. 0 lord of honour and majesty, Indra, bring us showers of the wealth of cows, lands, knowledge and culture for the seekers of light, and horses, advancement and achievement for the seekers of progress. (Rg. 8-61-7) 
196 :leading lights of humanity, the celebrated sage best settled and giver of settlement mentally and spiritually does not ignore or neglect even the last of you but honours you all. 0 lovers and benefactors of the nation, cometoday now itself, join and enjoy the delicious taste of our achievement in your honour in the structure and order of a great society. (Rg. 7-59-3) 
197 :Ma cid any ad vi sahsata sakhayo md risanyata. Indramit stota vrsanam saca sute muhuruktha ca sahsata. No one can equal merely by action, much less hurt even byyajnas, that person who has won the favour and grace of Indra, lord divine who is rising as well as raising his devotees high, who is universally adored, universal genius, redoubtable and invincibly illustrious by his own essential power. (Rg. 8-70-3) 
198 :Indra is that vibrant immanent lord of unbounded natural health and assertive life energy who, without piercing and without ligatures, provides for the original jointure of the series of separate vertebrae and col lar bones and then, later, heals and sets the same back into healthy order if they get dislocated or fractured. (Rg. 8-1-12) 
199 :M ay the hundreds and thousands of forces of nature and humanity harnessed to the golden chariot of the universe, radiant with light and dedicated to divinity, invokeand invite you hitherinto the heart so thatwemay experience the bliss of divine presence. (Rg. 8-1-24) 
200 :Indra, lord of honour and excellence, come by the rays of light, beautiful and colourful as the feathers of the peacock. May none, as fowlers ensnare birds, catch you. Outskirt the fowlers as a rainbow and come. (Rg. 3-45-1) 
201 :Anga, dear friend, Indra, dear and saviour, giver of joy, omnipotent lord, self-refulgent and omniscient, reveal the truth for mortal humanity. Lord of universal wealth, none other than you is the giver of peace and bliss. I speak the very word of yours in covenant. (Rg. 1-84-19) 
202 :Indra, lord all powerful, ruler of the world, yours is the honour, yours is the creation of wealth and joy. All by yourself, unsubdued, you eliminate irresistible forms of evil and darkness by the power you wield for the people. (Rg. 8-90-5) 
203 :We invoke Indra for our programmes of natural and environmental development. We invite Indra when the yajna of development is inaugurated. Lovers and admirers dedicated to him, we pray for his grace in our struggles of life, and we solicit his favour and guidance for the achievement of wealth, honour and excellence. (Rg. 8-3-5) 
204 :world, may these words of my divine adoration please you and exalt you. The saints and sages of vision and wisdom and fiery heat and purity of light adore you with songs of celebration. (Rg. 8-3-3) 
205 :The sweetest of honeyed songs of praise and vibrations of homage rise to you flying like victorious, unviolated and invincible chariots laden with gold heading for higher destinations. (Rg. 8-3-15) 
206 :J ust as a thirsty stag in the desert rushes to a pool full of water so, 0 friend in family of the wise, come morning, come evening, come fast and drink the soma of love and reverence in joy. (Rg. 8-4-3) 
207 :Sagdhyu 3s u sacipata indra visvabhir utibhih. Bhagain na hi tva yasasam vasuvidam anu sura caramasi. Indra, lord of omnipotent action and infinitely various victories, with all powers, protections and inspirations, strengthen and energise us for excellent works without del ay. As the very honour, splendour and treasure-home of the universe, 0 potent and heroic lord, we live in pursuit of your glory to justify our existence and win our destiny. (Rg. 8-61-5) 
208 :Indra, lord of bliss and omnipotence, the food, energy and vitality which you bear and bring from the sources of pranic energy such as sun, air, cloud and cosmic intelligence is great and admirable. 0 lord of power and glory, pray advance the devotees who appreciate, develop and celebrate this energy and spread the holy grass of yaj na i n gratitude to you, offer homage to you and develop your gifts. (Rg. 8-97-1) 
209 :Indra, men in general, learned experts of vision and wisdom, illustrious powers of law and order, and fighting warriors of defence and protection all together, raising a united voice of praise, prayer and appreciation, with songs of holiness and acts of piety, invoke and invite you, ancient, nearest and most excellent lord of power and lustre, to inaugurate their yajnic celebration of the soma session of peaceful and exciting programme of development. (Rg. 8-3-7) 
210 :Indra kratum na a bhara pita putrebhyo yathd. Siksa no asmin puruhuta yamani jiva jyotirasimahi. as father does for his children. 0 lord universally invoked and worshipped, instruct us as a teacher at this present time so that we, ordinary souls, may have the new light of life and living experience of Divinity. (Rg. 7-32-26) 
211 :Ma na indra para vrnag bhava nah sadha- madye. Tvam na uti tvamin na apyarh ma na indra paravrnak. I ndra, Iord supreme of truth, goodness and beauty, pray forsake us not, be with us as a friend in the great hall of life and joy, you are our protector, you alone are ultimately our end and aim worth attaining, pray do not forsake us. (Rg. 8-97-7) 
212 :Vay am glia tva sutdvanta apo na vrktabarhisah. Pavitrasya prasravanesu vrtrahan pari stotara asate. Indra, destroyer of evil, darkness and suffering, we, your celebrants, having distilled the soma, spread and occupied the holy grass, we, sit and wait on the vedi for your presence in the flux of life as holy performers, while the flow of pure immortality continues all round in the dynamics of existence. (Rg. 8-33-1) 
213 :Indra, ruler of the world, whatever the lustre and splendour in humanity across history, whatever the power and wealth among communities, whatever the virtue and quality in thefive elements of nature or lands of the earth, or whatever the strength and vigour of the world of existence, you bear and symbolise all that. Pray, 0 lord, bear and bring us all that. (Rg. 6-46-7) 
214 :True it is thus you are our protector, virile and generous yourself and an inspiration and driving force for the virile and the brave, unbound, uncountered, brave and illustrious, harbinger of the showers of peace and joy and known as omnificent and sublime all over the world far and near. (Rg. 8-33-10) 
215 :Abhi vo viram andhaso madesu gay a gird maha vicetasam. Indram nama srutyam sakinam vaco yatha. In the ecstasy of your soma celebration, with the best of word and voice, sing in praise of Indra, mighty brave, highly knowledgeable and wise, renowned of name and versatile in power and competence. (Rg. 8-46-14) 
216 :Indra, lord ruler of the wealth of nations, for the men of wealth, power, honour and generosity of heart, and for me too, give a home made of three metals and materials, comfortable in three seasons of summer, winter and rains, a place of rest, peace and security for complete well being. Give the light for them, keep off the blaze from them. (Rg. 6-46-9) 
217 :Just as the rays of light share and diffuse the radiance of the sun, so you too share and reflect the golden glories of Indra, the cosmic soul. Let us meditate on the di vi ne presence and for our share enj oy the ecstasy of bl i ss vi brati ng i n the worl d of past and future creati on by virtue of Indra's omnipresent majesty. (Rg. 8-99-3) 
218 :Never can an impious, ungodly mortal find that food and energy in life which that other person can find who yokes those dynamic energies and powers in his search for progress which Indra deploys in his creative and evolutionary programme of existence. (Rg. 8-70-7) 
219 :Indra, lord of universal energy, world power and human forces, is worthy of reverence and invocation in all our joint battles of life. M ay the lord of strongest bow, destroyer of evil and dispeller of darkness and ignorance, great and glorious as sung in the Rks, grace our songs of adoration and faithful efforts with the beauty and glory of success. (Rg. 8-90-1) 
220 :Indra, you protect, promote and rule over the lower orders of wealth of the world. You promote and rule over the middle order of the world's wealth. And you rule and shine over wealth of the highest order of the world. You are the true and the eternal power. No one can resist you among the lands and lights of the world. W ho would not accept you? (Rg. 7-32-16) 
221 :Where do you move and reach? Where do you reside and abide? No one can say. Your mind and presence is everywhere, universal. 0 lord of the warlike dynamics of existence, pivotand churner of the universe, breaker of the citadels of darkness and ignorance, come and bless us, the celebrants and singers of Gayatri hymns invoke and adore you. (Rg. 8-1-7) 
222 :Vayam enam ida hyopipemeha vajrinam. Tasmd u adya savane sutam bhara nunarh bhusata srute. Here today as before we have regaled this lord of the thunderbolt. For him, again, now, all of one mind, bear and bring the distilled soma of homage, and worship him who would, for certain for joy of the song, grace the celebrants. (Rg. 8-66-7) 
223 :I adore I ndra, lord supreme, who rules the people, and who is the irresistible and universal mover by waves of cosmic energy, saviour of all humanity, supreme warrior and winner of cosmic battles of the elemental forces and who destroys the evil, darkness and poverty of the world. (Rg. 8-70-1) 
224 :Indra, lord indomitable, whoever, whatever and wherever we fear, make us fearless from that. 0 lord of might and world power, pray strengthen us with your powers and protections of the highest order. Eliminate the jealous, the malignant, the disdainers and contemners. (Rg. 8-61-13) 
225 :home of life, may the centre column of our house be firm. May the lord be the protective armour of the makers of soma. M ay Indra, lover of soma to the last drop, be destroyer of the strongholds of evil which nevertheless persist through time, and may the lord be friends with the sages. (Rg. 8-17-14) 
226 :Indra, lord of light and ruling power, your devoted friend ever blest with the powers of life's progress onwards like a chariot hero of war, enjoying grace of person and culture, wealth of knowledge and riches of the earth, has his full share of good health, full age and gifts of existence, and he goes forward to the assembly of people with the graces of full moon among stars. (Rg. 8-4-9) 
227 :Yad dyava indra te sataih satam bhumir uta syuh. Na tvd vajrint sahasram surya anu na jatamasta rodasi. Indra, lord of thunder, if there were a hundred heavens, and if there were a hundred earths, they would not be able to rival you. Not a thousand suns, nor heavens, earths and skies together would match you at the rise in manifestation. (Rg. 8-70-5) 
228 :Yad indra prag apag udag nyag vd buy as e nrbhih. Sima puru nrsuto asyanavesi pra- sardha turvase. Indra, illustrious lord of the world, ruler and commander of human forces, karmayogi, when you are invoked by people anywhere east or west, north or south, up or down, then, 0 lord of excellence, you feel highly impelled by those many and come and act as the destroyer of many evi I s for the peopl e of reverence and exceptional strength. (Rg. 8-4-1) 
229 :Kas tarn indra tva vasava martyo dadharsati. Sraddha hi te maghavan parye divi vaji vajam sisasati. Indra, lord ruler of the world, who can assail that mortal who wholly lives under the shade and shelter of your protection? 0 lord of the wealth and power of existence, whoever reposes his faith and dynamism in you as the sole saviour and pilot while he is in action receives his share of victory in the light of divinity. (Rg. 7-32-14) 
230 :Lightning and fire divine, this light of the dawn, shaking up its locks of hair and proclaiming its risewith its flames, radiates before life on the earth is on wheels, and moves on thirty stepsof timeand space.(Rg.6-59-6) 
231 :Indra, closest power divine, comeat the earliest with sure protections of defi nite resol ution of mi nd. L ord of supreme peace, come with most peaceful fulfilment of desire, come, dear friend, with most friendly powers of protection and progress. (Rg. 8-53-5) 
232 :Let not your worshippers be far away from us, nor let them detain you. Come to our house of celebration from the farthest distance even, and when you are here, Iisten to our songs of celebration and divine adoration. (Rg. 7-32-1) 
233 :Extract, mature and prepare the nectar of life for the lord, I ndra, wi elder of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment and destroyer of evil, who loves the soma spirit of life's beauty and joy. Ripen and perfect the drinks and drugs for health care and protection of life, and create the state of comfort and well being, giving success and fulfilment for those who work for the joy and fulfilment of all in general. (Rg. 7-32-8) 
234 :We invoke and adore I ndra, lord of glory, constant watcher of humanity and human actions, and pray: 0 lord protector of truth, commanding infinite passion vitality and flames of fiery forces, master of universal wealth, be with us for our advancement in the struggles Ashvins, lords of noble action and givers of wealth by noble action, for the noble actions of ours, bless us with the gifts of wealth day and night. We pray, may your generosity never wear away from us. M ay our charity too never forsake us. (Rg. 1-139-5) 
235 :Whenever a mortal celebrant would appreciate, praise or exhaltthe rich, generous and the magnanimous, let him with free and vibrant voice appreciate, exhalt and worship Varuna, universal supporter and sustainer of the people and powers of discipline, resolution and graciousness of generosity. M ay Indra, lord omnipotent, master of the world's wealth and power, directly listen to our joint prayer for worldly and spiritual advancement with attentive ear and sympathetic understanding, and may the lord of supreme power come to protect and promote our yajnic programme and prayer and taste the pleasure of success. (Rg. 8-61-1) 
236 :Make ca na tvadrivah para sulkaya diyase. Na sahasraya nayutaya vajrivo na sataya satamagha. You command greater wealth, power and prestigious settlement for me than my father, you are closer to me than my indifferent brother. Only my mother and you are equal to provide me solace and protection, 0 shelter of the universe, for my wealth and celebrity in success (my mother as individual mother and you as universal mother). (Rg. 8-1-6) 
237 :These somas of the nation's honour and excellence energised by the ferment of inspiration and enthusiasm have been distilled to celebrate the dignity and majesty of the land and the ruler Indra. 0 lord wielder of the thunderbolt, come to our hall of fame for the joy of a drink of them. Come fast by the chariot drawn by horses of the winds. (Rg. 7-32-4) 
238 :Indra, adorable lord of knowledge, these some sanatives of the celebrant are for your joyous appreciation and acceptance. Pray listen to our voice of submission, taste, evaluate and promote this honey sweet of soma, and bless the celebrant with ample reward. Today I invoke Indra, I invoke the motherly spirit of the universe, giver of total fulfilment of the heart's desi re, pi eased and sti rred by the chant of G ayatri songs of adoration, omnipotent and omnificent, generous as M other Nature, giver of ample gifts beyond the earth and the earthly cow, harbinger of showers of the cherished nectar milk of life, all blissful and gracious. I ndra, generous lord, when you come to give wealth to a celebrant like me. N o one can stop and frustrate your will. (Rg. 8-88-3) 
239 :Who would for certain know I ndra in this created world of beauty and glory, how much power and force hewieldswhilehe rules and sustainsit, Indrawho wears the helmet and breaks down the strongholds of negativities with his lustrous might, the lord who shares and enjoys the soma of his own creation? (Rg. 8-33-7) 
240 :Indra, ruler of the commonwealth, as you are ruler of the law and keeper of the discipline of creativity and yajnic production, pray removefrom the house of yajna the person who cannot observe the discipline and does not keep the pace of creativity and contribution. 0 lord of power and wealth, advance and on top promote our soma sanative of universal value and interest for the peace, progress and affluence of the nation. May Tvashta, divine spirit of natural evolution of forms and institutions, our divine Word, Parjanaya, soma showers of vitality, Brahmanaspati, sun and divine cosmic protection and inviolable mother Infinity alongwith our brothers and our progeny protect and justify our saviour and inviolable word of promise and resolution for the safety and security of life and the environment. Never are you unfruitful, never uncharitable, you are always with the giver, closer and closer, more and more, again and again, 0 lord of wealth and honour, and the charity of divinity ever grows higher and promotes the giver. (Rg. 8-51-7) 
241 :Indra, lord of mind and soul, wielder of adamantine will and energy, zealous celebrants and leading lights serve and adore you today as ever before in the past. Thus adored and contemplated, listen to the prayers of the devotees in meditation, come and arise in your own abode of the sage's heart. (Rg. 8-99-1) 
242 :Thegreatand glorious dawn, child of thelight of divinity, is seen rising, dispelling mists and darkness, and illuminates with light the world of our actions, brilliant guide as she is for the day. (Rg. 7-81-1) 
243 :Brilliant A shvi ns, these yajakas dedicated to life divine invoke and call upon you for light, and I too, 0 versatile commanders of the wealth of knowledge, power and vision, invite you and pray for protection and advancement since you visit and bless every individual and every community. (Rg. 7-74-1) 
244 :Ashvins, brilliant powers like the sun and moon, promoters of light and truth, science and industry, this is the sweetest soma distilled for you in morning yajnas so far till yesterday. Taste it and enjoy it and bring the jewels for the generous man of yajnic charity. (Rg. 1-47-1) 
245 :Hasten, 0 master of ceremonies, let the soma be prepared and flow forth for service. Indra is thirsty, he has harnessed his mighty chariot forces, indeed the thunderous breaker of clouds has arrived. (Rg. 8-4-11) 
246 :Indra, lord of honour, power and excellence, you are the eternal lord of universal wealth and shelter home of all existence, invoked and worshipped in all challenging situations. Pray bring us the knowledge and experience of that essence of ultimate reality which is smaller than the smallest and greater than the greatest. (Rg. 7-32-24) 
247 :Indra, lord ruler of the world, giver of wealth and excellence, as much as you grant, so much I wish I should control and rule. I would hold it only to support the devotees of divinity and would not spend it away for those who indulge in sin and evil. (Rg. 7-32-18) 
248 :of life and in the internal conflicts of mind, you are the superior over all assailants. You are the destroyer of evil and calumny, creator of goodness and eliminator of impediments. Pray drive off all evil thoughts and oppositions of life and mind. (Rg. 8-99-5) 
249 :You transcend the bounds of heaven by your might. The regions of earth and skies encompass you not. Indra, lord of majesty and omnipotence, bring us food, strength and the divine power of sustenance for life. (Rg.8-88-5) 
250 :Distilled is the spirit of life, divine, brilliant, the very essence of earth and nature's energy. L et I ndra, the ruling lord of life, by his very nature and origin, join and address the assembly and make it resound. 0 lord of instant powers and faculties, we invoke and invite you by our yajnic adorations. J oin us in the ecstasy of our celebration and inspire our congregation to awake into enlightenment. (Rg. 7-21-1) 
251 :Indra, lord ruler and commander of the world, the hoi y seat for you i s created and reserved i n the house of nations. Elected and invited by all equally, pray come and take it with the leading lights of humanity in the manner that you may be our saviour and protector for advancement, receive and disburse the means and materials of life's wealth and comfort, and be happy and celebrate the joy of life with the soma of the world's excellence. (Rg. 7-24-1) 
252 :open the springs, open the doors, let the streams aflow, and free the bonded to live free and enjoy, you who break the cloud and the mountain, let out the streams to flow into rivers and the sea, having destroyed the demons and broken the cloud. (Rg. 5-32-1) 
253 :Susvanasa indra stumasi tva sanisyantascittu- vinpnna vajam. A no bhara suvitam yasya kona tana tmana sahydma tvotah. Indra, lord of abundant wealth and power, creative and expressive devotees with divine gifts of heavenly food and energy, we celebrate and adore you. Pray bless us with that wealth and well being which you please is for our good, so that, under your gracious protection, we may win the power and prosperity of life to live well and enjoy the beauty and goodness of life to the fulfilment of our heart and soul. (Rg. 10-148-1) 
254 :Jagrhma te daksinam indra hastam vasuyavo vasupate vasunam. Vidma hi tva gopatiih sura gonamasmabhyam citram vrsanam rayim dah. of the world's wealth, peace, comfort and joy, we, seekers of wealth, honours and excellence, hold on to your liberal hand of generosity. Lord of omnipotence, we know that you are the ruler and controller of the earths, stars, knowledge, wisdom and culture of life. Pray bless us with profuse and wondrous source wealth of the world with honours, excellence and happiness. (Rg. 10-47-1) 
255 :Leading people call upon Indra, lord ruler of the world, in thei r serious struggles of I ife and pray for those concentrativefaculties of mind and intelligence by which they can join the divine presence and win their goal. The lord is the brave, generous and fearless leader of humanity in their corporate life, lover of strength and inspirer of heroic souls. 0 lord, give us the grace of your divine presence and lead us in our development of lands and cows and in our plans of education, enlightenment and our vision of the divine Word. (Rg. 7-27-1) 
256 :Men of vibrant intelligence and flying imagination, seers and sages with love and reason, in a mood of supplication, prayer and faith sit and abide by Indra. 0 lord, unveil the truth from darkness, perfect our vision for the light of truth, release us for we are bound like birds in snares. (Rg. 10-73-11) 
257 :Brahma, first and ultimate self-manifestive self- refulgent reality of existence since eternity, from the law and potential of its own essence, invokes Prakrti, original Nature, mother cause of all past, present and future objects of the universe, and thence creates the great and glori ous objects over the vast regions of space which are exemplary revelations of its power of creation and its glory of Being. Brahma is the only object of love and worship. Let me compose an original and comprehensive song of praise in my own words in a state of peace overflowing with reverence in honour of this great hero, Indra, mighty performer of action, admirable wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment, unshakable embodiment of tranquillity. (Rg. 6-32-1) 
258 :The dark passion of pride with its ten thousand assistants and associates comes, occupies the affections and suppresses the emotive and creative streams of life, but Indra, noble leader of men, the soul, with its great thought and action, takes this bully over, controls its violence and covers it with sweetness and love. (Rg. 8-96-13) 
259 :Old age consumes even the youthful man of versatile action whom many fear to face in battle and flee. Look at the inscrutable power of the lord divine by whose inevitable law of mutability the man who was living yesterday is dead today, and the one that dies today would be living to tomorrow. (Rg. 10-55-5) 
260 :Thus does Indra become a victorious enemy for the seven unrivalled unholy tendencies of sense and mind and emerges a brilliant unrivalled hero. Thus does he find the real joyous heaven and earth otherwise, for him, covered in deep darkness. Thus do you, 0 soul, bear and bring happiness to the regions of life vested in dignity and excellence. (Rg. 8-96-16) 
261 :I, seeker and celebrant, adore you, Indra, like a friend, like a divine Voice, wielder of thunder, fire armed, destroyer of multitudes, virile and generous, stable beyond disturbance, heaven high, and breaker of the clouds. You are the master, you reduce the enemy to dust. Bear and bring homage, assistance and cooperation and offer positive thoughts and advice to Indra, your leader and ruler. Great is he, promoter of great people and the common wealth, and a leader wideawake with deep and distant foresight. 0 leader and ruler of the land, be good to the settled ancient people and take care of the farming communities and other professionals so that all feel happy and fulfilled without frustration. (Rg. 7-31-10) 
262 :We invoke, sing and celebrate Indra, lord giver of light and wisdom, commander of honour and prosperity, highest guide and leader of humanity, in this battle of life. Instantly does he listen to our prayers, bright and blazing is he in the battles and contests of life for protection, killer where he must be, breaker of the clouds of darkness, ignorance and poverty, and he is the winner, collector and consolidator of the wealths of life. We invoke him for protection, progress and victory in our battles of life. (Rg. 3-30-22) 
263 :H is wheel of power and presence which operates across the spaces and rules the dynamics of nature and humanity also fills and covers the whole system of existence with honey sweets of joy for life and for the lord's own fulfilment too, the same honey which fertilises the earth and fills the clouds, the nectar that is filled in the cow's udders and sweetens the sap in the herbs. (Rg. 10-73-9) 
264 :For the sake of good and all round well being of life, we invoke and study that wind and electric energy of the middle regions which is fast and victorious, moved by divine nature, powerful, shaker of the clouds and energiser of sound waves, inviolable, war-like heroic and most dynamic, moving at the speed of energy. (Rg.10-178-1) 
265 :In every battle of life one after another, I invoke Indra, lord giver of wealth, honour and power, saviour Indra, protector Indra, brave Indra invoked with love and devotion, pure and powerful, universally invoked and adored. M ay Indra bring us the good life and all round well being. (Rg. 6-47-11) 
266 :We join and adore I ndra, lord of cosmic energy, who wields the thunder in his right hand and controls the versatile potentials of complementary currents of cosmic energy in the universal circuit, who with energy shakes the earthly vegetation, rises high, and with his forces and implicit potentials acts as catalytic agent and vests us with natural power and success in achievement. (Rg. 10-23-1) 
267 :Accept, honour and exalt I ndra, ruler of the world, destroyer of untruth by the rule of truth and righteousness, bold, inspiring, great, unbounded, mighty generous, wielder of the thunderbolt of law and force, who is destroyer of the dark cloud of evil and selfishness, provider of food, energy and advancement, giver of honour and excellence, magnanimous and all-ways successful achiever of glory. (Rg. 4-17-8) 
268 :Indra, ruler of the world, whoever the mortal single or commanding a force, proud and impetuous, that faces us with the intent to destroy, pray beat them by your power in battle. May we, brave and advancing under your protection, defeat them and keep them under control. Whom people invoke and call in the struggle for light and enlightenment against darkness and evil, that is Indra. Whom they call upon and press forward when the battle is raging, for victory, or when the vision is close to the mind in communion and they yarn for the union, that is Indra. Whom the sages inspire and applaud in the contests of the veterans for scientific achievement, or when the plans for action, water and energy are ripe for the green signal, that is Indra. Indra and Parvata, sun and cloud, come on the grand chariot of light, wind and rain, bring us lovely foods and drinks of energy for the heroic people, 0 powers divine and generous, receive the offerings in the yajnas of love, faith and non-violence, feed on the music of the songs, and wax with the hymns of celebration. (Rg. 3-53-1) 
269 :Sing songs of praise in honour if Indra who makes incessant streams of water flow from the oceans of space and sky, and, with his cosmic power and actions, sustains the heaven and earth in motion like wheels of a chariot held in balance by the axle. (Rg. 10-89-4) 
270 :With love and devotion, friendly celebrants come to you, I ndra, who pervade and transcend the vast spaces of existence a long long way. And I pray that shining self-refulgent in this world and knowing your parental obligation, you bless the father with a son. (Rg.10-10-1) 
271 :Who joins the bullocks to the front yoke of the chariot of Truth to-day as ever? The Lord Ruler of the universe. And he who joins the men of noble action, heroes of passion and righteousness, maintain peace and joy, may he who joins these to truth and promotes these servants of truth to prosperity live long. (Rg. 1-84-16) 
272 :The singers of Gayatri celebrate you, Indra, lord of song and joy, with the hymns of Sama-Veda. The devotees of Rgveda worship Indra, lord of light, with Rks. And the sage scholars of all the Vedas, 0 lord of a hundred noble acts of cosmic yajna, maintain the line of divine worship as the centre-string of the human family. (Rg. 1-10-1) 
273 :celebrate and glorify Indra, lord infinite and glorious like the expansive oceans of space, highest redeemer, higher than all other saviours, sole true lord victorious of the battles of life between good and evil, ultimate protector and promoter of humanity and ruler of existence. (Rg. 1-11-1) 
274 :Indra, lord ruler, breaker of the cloud, releaser of the waters of life, ride your chariot of the latest design and come. The horses are yoked with the right mantra and necessary stuffs. And may the high-priest of knowledge with his words of knowledge exhilarate you at heart. (Rg. 1-84-3) 
275 :Indra, 0 lord of light and power, mysterious and sublime, refulgent ruler of the clouds and mountains, omniscient dispenser of munificence, whatever the rain of blessings showered by you, whatever the wealth and honour of success, give us with both hands. (Rg. 5-39-1) 
276 :Indra, listen to the invocation of the devotee's voice of deep silence who offers service and homage to you, and bless the devotee with wealth of brave progeny, lands, cows, knowledge and total fulfilment. You are great, unbounded is your munificence. (Rg. 8-95-4) 
277 :Asavi soma indra te savistha dhrsnava gahi. A tvd Pmaktvindriyam rajah suryo na rasmibhih. Indra, lord ruler of power, strong and resolute, come, this soma has been distilled for you. May it exhilarate and strengthen your mind as the sun fills and brightens the sky with its rays. (Rg. 1-84-1) 
278 :Indra, ruler of the world, come with all your powers and perceptions to the sage's adoration and instruction, and from the light and exhortation of the elevating sage, 0 seeker of enlightenment, go and rise to the heights of divinity. (Rg. 8-34-1) 
279 :A tva giro rathlrivasthuh sutesu girvanah. Abhi tv a samanusata gdvo vats am na dhenavah. Indra, adorable lord of glory, when the soma sense of life's beauty and meaning is realised, let our voices of adoration reach you fast as a charioteer, and as mothers out of love incline to their children, so let our voices too closely abide with you. (Rg. 8-95-1) 
280 :Come, friends, and, with happy chant of pure holy Sama songs, adore Indra, pure and bright spirit and power of the world, who feels pleased and exalted by honest unsullied songs of adoration. Let the supplicant with a pure heart please and win the favour of Indra and rejoice. (Rg. 8-95-7) 
281 :Yo rayim vo rayintamo yo dyumnairdyumna- vattamah. Somah sutah sa indra te sti svadha- pate madah. Indra, supreme lord of your own nature, power and law, that soma beauty and bliss of the world of existence created by you, which is most abundant in wealth and brilliance, which is most glorious in splendour and majesty, is all yours, all for yourself, all your own pleasure, passion and ecstasy. (Rg. 6-44-1) 
282 :Indra, give us a full age of good health, bless our soul vested and rested in existence, raise it to greatness now lying in the depth of the heart cave, and raise our mind and intelligence, bound by previous karma, to purity and efficiency. Cleanse our thoughts and speech of violence and passion. I ndra, bravest of the brave, protector of the good and true, just as we turn the chariot, so do we draw your attention and pray you turn to us and come for our protection, welfare and enlightenment, lord of infinite action and conqueror of enemies. (Rg. 8-68-1) 
283 :He, eternal spirit of the universe, love and desire and indeed the ideal of the great among humanity, is realised through holy acts of prayer and yajna, by the doors of whose grace the thinking man, fatherly man sustainer of life, attains noble knowledge and competence for action among the divinities of nature and humanity. (Rg. 8-63-1) 
284 :Where the alert and instantly moving Maruts, veteran scholars and achievers brilliant with knowledge and efficiency, take Indra, the ruler, by chariots of dynamic scientific advancement, to yajnic congregations, there enjoying the honey sweets of soma and exciting possibilities they create wealth of food, energy and excellences of art and culture. All ye children of the earth, for you all I praise and celebrate that Indra, lord dispenser of justice and punishment without anger or violence, commander of power and forces of the nation, challenger of all negative forces of the world, leader of humanity, and great and glorious ruler of the men of vision and acts of universal value. (Rg. 6-44-4) 
285 :We sing in praise of Dadhikra, divine energy, victorious, all achieving spirit and power, who may, we pray, refi ne our sense of taste and other ref i nements and may help us liveafull and healthy life across the floods of existence. (Rg. 4-39-6) 
286 :Breaker of the enemy forts, youthful, creative and imaginative, hero of boundless strength, sustainer of the acts of the world and disposer, wielder of the thunderbolt, universally acclaimed and celebrated is risen into prominence. (Rg, 1-11-4) 
287 :For your progress, offer libations of holy fuel and fragrance, triple refined and intensified, with trishtubh hymns of Vedicformulaeintheservice of Indra, cosmic spirit of energy and power, happy and exciting, who i nspi res the brave and shi nes you w ith versati Ie creative intellect for the advancement of your science of yajna for further development. (Rg. 8-69-1) 
288 :Veteran self-established sageswho know thelight of divinity and divine creation, having realized the truth in their mind and vision, say that there are two forces of Kashyapa, divine Intelligence, both simultaneous, whose sole law and purpose is to maintain the cosmic yajna of creative evolution through the operations of nature: these forces are like twins and complementary: centrifugal and centripetal versions of thedivinecosmic energy. J ustasaman rejoices with hischildren and friends and bestows lots of knowledge and wealth on them, so does Shakra, omnipotent Indra, lord of wealth and knowledge, rejoice to bestow admirable mantras of elevating light of Vedic lore on the generous soul for its advancement. (Rg. 1-10-5) 
289 :I pray to Indra, your lord and father, master controller of the irresistible powers and forces of the universe, for divine protection of the people by the dynamics of his moving powers of nature and humanity. (Rg. 8-68-4) 
290 :The mortal man at peace who with his intelligence and holy action serves, worships and offers homage to you, Indra, lord and leader of the light of heaven, he enjoys peace and prosperity under protection of the vast heaven and crosses overall hate and jealousy as well as sin and evil. (Rg. 6-2-4) 
291 :Indra, hero of a hundred holy actionswith insight and counsel, wide and high are your powers and wealth, abundant your gifts. U Itimate watcher and observer of all that is in the world, ruler of the mighty social order, lead us on to wealth, power, honour and excellence and help us rise to the heights. (Rg. 5-38-1) 
292 :Blessed Dawn, fiery messenger of light and life, may humans and animals as the birds of flight, we pray, rise and reach unto the bounds of heaven in pursuance of the time and seasons of your arrival. (Rg. 1-49-3) 
293 :Ami ye deva sthana madhya a rocane divah. Kadva rtam kadamrtam ka pratna va ahutih. We use and chant Rks and Samans while we perform yajna, (Rks which give us the knowledge of the facts and processes of nature to be applied in programmes of human action, and the Samans which joyously celebrate the successful completion of the programme). By these, all works are initiated, conducted and completed. They shine, resonate, and glorify the yajna in the hall and they conducttheyajna in thedivine forces of nature in the universe. All the citizens together, in order to elect an equal for the purpose of governance, create and shape I ndra, the ruler, the I eader w ho is superi or to others i n al I battl es of life, highest by noble creative action, eliminator of negative and frustrative opposition, illustrious, most vigorous and emphatic in expression, courageous and passionate in action. (Rg. 8-97-10) 
294 :Indra, potent ruler of nature and humanity, lord of thunder and clouds, mover of mountains, I am all faith, reverence and admiration in truth of commitment for your first and foremost power and passion by which you break the clouds and release the showers of rain for humanity, by virtue of which both heaven and earth abide by your law, the power and force by which the firmament shakes with awe. (Rg. 10-147-1) 
295 :AII ye people of the world, come together with all your power and luster under one banner of the sole lord of the universe who, alone by himself, is the one adorable lord of humanity. He, the one eternal absolute lord, by himself alone, initiates and guides the ever new emerging persons and powers keen for success and victory to tread on the paths of action they should follow. line ta indra te vayam purustuta ye tvarabhya caramasi prabhuvaso. Na hi tvadanyo girvano girah saghatksoniriva prati taddharya no vacah. These are yours, Indra, We are yours, lord praised and celebrated by all. Beginning with you we go about the business of living, lord of existence and shelter of life. Other than you there is no one else, lord of holy Word, who would listen to our prayer. Hear our prayer as the voice of earth and humanity and respond with Address these comprehensive words of prayer and celebration with offers of yajna to Indra, lord ruler and sustainer of the people, munificent, honourable, growing in power and prosperity, universally acclaimed and celebrated, immortal in fame and glory, close and closer day by day in love and exhortation of the people. Let the songs glorify the lord. (Rg. 3-51-1) 
296 :AII my thoughts, words and actions, all together in perfect unison concentrated on the love and light of divinity, ecstatically adore and celebrate Indra, lord almighty of existence. J ust as wives with love embrace their human lover, protector and husband, so do my prayers centre on I ndra, lord of glory, power and purity, for all round protection, promotion and well being. (Rg. 10-43-1) 
297 :With holy words and songsof adoration, worship Indra, lord of power and glory, destroyer of enemies. C el ebrate and exhi Iarate H i m who is generous and vi ri le, universally invoked and honoured, master of the Riks, wielder of wealth deep as ocean, greatest of the great, and lord of knowledge and wisdom. H is gifts and graces for humanity range around like rays of the lights of heaven for the joy of the people. 0 people of the world, thank and adore the lord all wise and most gracious. (Rg. 1-51-1) 
298 :Honour that Indra, lord of glory and virile generosity who takes us high to the skies. H undreds of noble and creative craftsmen together with their expert performance work on and engineer his glorious chariot which can cover the spatial paths across the skies for the sake of protection and defence. I wish I too could fly by that chariot. (Rg. 1-52-1) 
299 :Radiant and fertile, beauties of the worlds, vast and abundant, extensive, replete with honey sweets, the sun and the earth are sustained by the laws of nature with the immanent will of Varuna, centre-hold of the universe. Undecaying they are, immensely creative and exuberantwith thewatersof life, beautiful, blissful. (Rg. 6-70-1) 
300 :Indra, lord of light and glory, ruler of the world, when you fill the earth and the environment with splendour like the dawn, the divine M other Nature raises you and manifests you as the great ruler of the great people of the world. The gracious mother elevates you in refulgence and majesty as the mighty Indra. (Indra at the cosmic level is the Lord Almighty; at the human level, the world ruler; and at the individual level, Indra is the soul, ruler of the body, senses, mind and intelligence.) (Rg. 10-134-1) 
301 :AII ye men and women of the earth, offer words of welcome and hospitality to joyous Indra, lord giver of the power of knowledge, who, in a simple natural manner, breaks open the secret treasures of the dark womb of nature and makes the streams of knowledge flow. We, seekers of protection and knowledge, invoke Indra, lord of light and power, rich and generous, expert in the use of the thunderbolt of knowledge against the demon of darkness, and commander of the tempestuous Maruts of social dynamics, and we pray for his love and friendship. (Rg. 1-101-1) 
302 :When a special yajnic programme for the realisation of special knowledge, power and expertise in a particular field is completed with hymns of thanks and praise to divinity, then Indra, lord omnipotent and omniscient, sanctifies the joint endeavour of holiness and blesses the programme with success. Great is he. (Rg. 8-13-1) 
303 :Indra, the soma nectar which you infuse in the sun and in the three worlds of experience, i.e., earth, heaven and firmament and which you infuse in thewinds and enjoy to the last drop, we pray for. (Rg. 8-12-16) 
304 :And 0 high priest of the creative yajna of love and non-violence, offer the most delightful and ever exhilarating of honey sweets of the soma of faith and devotion to I ndra, since thus is how the mighty hero is served and worshipped. (Rg. 8-24-16) 
305 :Prepare, offer and regale Indra with the nectar drink of faith and performance. He values, enjoys and promotes the honey sweets of peace, pleasure and progress and with his greatness inspires the people with will and competence and ambition for progress and excellence. (Rg. 8-24-13) 
306 :Come friends all together and let us adore Indra, lord and leader worthy of joint worship and exaltation, who, by himself alone, rules over all peoples of the world. (Rg. 8-24-19) 
307 :Sing Brhatsama hymns in adoration of Indra, vibrant spirit of the universe and giver of fulfilment, grand and infinite, source ordainer and keeper of the law of universal Dharma, giver and protector of knowledge and karma, the lord adorable. (Rg. 8-98-1) 
308 :Dear friend, the one sole lord who gives everything in life to the man of charity and generosity is Indra, supreme ruler of the world, who is constant, unmoved and unchallenged. (Rg. 1-84-7) 
309 :Come friends, let us for your sake sing a song of adoration in honour of I ndra, lord of power, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and punishment in order to glorify the noblest leader of resolute will and inviolable command. (Rg. 8-24-1) 
310 :In praise of that admirable power and grandeur of yours, I ndra, I sing for the pleasure of divine favour, by which, 0 lord of mighty noble acts, you destroy the demon of darkness and want by your force and splendour. Great and good are the gifts of Indra. (Rg. 8-62-8) 
311 :Yasya tyacchambaram made divodasaya randhayan. Ay am sa soma indra te sutah piba. Indra, lord of power and glory, this is that soma distilled and seasoned for you in the exhilaration and ecstasy of which you, like the sun on high, break down the forces of darkness and evil to promote the spirit of light and generosity. Pray drink of it to your heart's content and protect and promote the spirit of it. (Rg. 6-43-1) 
312 :Indra, come, take us over as your own. Dear and giver of fulfilment you are, all dominant by nature, character and action, inconceivably open and bright, expansive and unbounded all round like a cloud of vapour, lord and master of the light of heaven. (Rg. 8-98-4) 
313 :Indra, lord most potent, highest protector and promoter of the beauty and joy of life, that ecstatic passion of yours which universally pervades, manifests and reveals your might and glory and by which you destroy the negative forces of life, we adore and pray for. (Rg. 8-12-1) 
314 :M ay the A dityas, powers of light and lifein nature and humanity, drive away all disease of body and mind and keep off negativities of thought and intelligence from us. M ay thechildren of imperishabledivinity keep us safe, far away from the onslaughts of sin and adversity. (Rg. 8-18-10) 
315 :Indra, lord ruler and controller of the dynamic forces of the world, drink this soma of ecstasy which, I am sure, would exhilarate you. The cloud, generative power of nature, has distilled it and showered on you. And just as a horse well controlled by the hands and reins of the driver moves to the right destination, so is this soma generated by the hands of the creator meant to exhort you to take the dominion to its destination. (Rg. 7-22-1) 
316 :Indra, lord of absolute might by nature, si nee birth of the universe, indeed for eternity, you are without a rival, need no leader, no friend and no comrade, but in the dynamics of human life you do want that the human should be your companion in and for his struggle for self-evolution and social progress. (Rg. 8-21-13) 
317 :A ganta ma risanyata prasthavano mapa s that a samanyavah. Drdha cidyamayisnavah. Come M aruts, warriors of nature and humanity. Do not hurt nor destroy the innocent. Already on the move as ever, pray do not tarry any more far away. Heroes of equal passion, will and desire to accomplish your mission, you can bend even the firmest forces of violence and bring them to reason. (Rg. 8-20-1) 
318 :Come lord of cows, horses and fertile lands, giver and protector of the nation and its glory, knowledge and wisdom and our creative activities, the somas of our success are for you to appreciate. 0 lord of life and life's joy of soma, come and join the ecstasy of our achievement and its celebration. (Rg. 8-21-3) 
319 :By you alone as our friend and comrade, 0 lord almighty, generous giver, can we counter a gasping contestant in this settled world order of humanity full of lands and cows, blest as we are with the light of knowledge and culture. (Rg. 8-21-11) 
320 :Indra, lord of vision and hero of a hundred great actions, bring us abundant and illustrious strength, courage and procreative energy by which we may fight out and win many battles of our life. (Rg. 8-98-10) 
321 :A nd 0 lord lover of song and celebration, I ndra, we send up vaulting voices of adoration and prayer to you like wave on waves of the flood rolling upon the sea for thefulfi 11ment of our dreams and ambitions. (Rg. 8-98-7) 
322 :Nestled like birds in the nest, in your exuberant, exciting, honey sweet yajnic world of light and joy overflowing with delicacies of food and drink, we bow to you and worship you in thankfulness. (Rg. 8-21-5) 
323 :The golden and brilliant people and forces of the land drink of the delicious, exciting and universal honey sweets of national pride and prestige and joyously cel ebrate thei r achievements i n the company of generous and valorous I ndra for the advancement of the honour and glory of the republic in obedience to the demands and discipline of the freedom and self-government of the nation. (Rg. 1-84-10) 
324 :Ittha hi soma inmado brahma cakara vardlia- nam. Savistha vajrinnojasa prdiivya nih sasa ahimarcannanu svarajyam. Giving to joyous freedom and self-government an exalted place of honour, Brahma, lord creator, invested the joy and excitement of life with animation, growth and independence. And for the same reason, Indra, strongest in courage and valour, wielder of the thunderbolt of freedom and self-government, with your might and main, strike off the serpent of evil, suffering and slavery from the earth for all time. (Rg. 1-80-1) 
325 :Indra, the hero who destroys V tra, the cloud of want and suffering, and releases the showers of plenty and prosperity, goes forward with the people for the achievement of strength and joy of the land of freedom and self-government. And him we invoke and exhort in the battles of life, great and small, so that he may defend and advance us in all our struggles for progress and lead us to victory. (Rg. 1-81-1) 
326 :To you, Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, mighty ruler of the republic, high as mountain and the cloud, cheers for incomparable excellence of valour since you, doing honour and reverence to the freedom and self- governance of the republ ic, destroyed that artful roari ng demon of a cloud of darkness with your extraordinary power. (Rg. 1-80-7) 
327 :Prehyabhihi dhrsnuhi na te vajro ni yamsate. Indr a nrmnam hi te savo hano vrtram jay a apo rcannanu svarajyam. Indra, lord of power and brilliance, ruler of the land, go forward. Go forward all round. Shake the evil. I rresistible is your thunderbolt of light and power. Your power and force is the wealth of the nation. Destroy the demon of want and drought, release and win the waters, plenty and prosperity and, in homage and reverence advancing the freedom and self-government of humanity, move ahead and higher. (Rg. 1-80-3) 
328 :When battles confront the nation, means and money are raised and prizes won for the brave. Commander of the forces, yoke the forces exuberant and raging for war. Destroy the enemy. Settle the victorious in wealth and peace. Indra, pray settle us in peace and comfort. (Rg. 1-81-3) 
329 :Noble men acquiring holy knowledge, rejoicing, dearest favourite saints and sages brilliant with their innate genius and virtue, ward off the evil and pray to Indrawith latest words of wisdom and homage. Indra, yoke your horses (on the wing and come to join the yajna). (Rg. 1-82-2) 
330 :Indra, lord of wealth and glory, listen to our prayer at the cl osest, not I i ke one di stant or different. A nd w hen we pray bless us with a voice of sweetness and the light of holy truth. Lord of speed and motion, yoke your horses (and come to join the yajna). (Rg. 1-82-1) 
331 :The moon glides in the middle regions of Antariksha in the midst of waters and pranic energies. So does the sun of wondrous rays run fast in the heaven of light. But the golden-rimmed flashes of lightning reveal themselves not to your state of consciousness. May the heaven and earth know the secret of this mystery and reveal it to men, the ruler and the people. (Rg. 1-105-1) 
332 :Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, the celebrant visionary of life's reality and mantric meaning, adores your achievement in befitting words of song in response to the beauty of your dearest chariot which is the carrier and harbinger of showers of wealth and well being. 0 creators and makers of the sweets of existence, the celebrant prays: Listen to my song of adoration and accept the invitation to live and create the joy of life. (Rg. 5-75-1) 
333 :A te agna idhimahi dyumantam dev ajar am. Yaddha syd te paniyasi samid didayati dyavisarh stotrbhya a bhara. Let us kindle you, light and fire of life, generous divinity, refulgent and unaging so that the wonderfully admirable light of your blaze shines in heaven and you bring food and energy for the celebrants. (Rg. 5-6-4) 
334 :Like fire for comfort, with our own holy chant for the internal yajna of our spiritual purification and your joy, we fellow yajakas, choose you, Agni, high priest of cosmic yajna, all pervasive purifier by the white heat of his divine radiance. Verily the lord is great and glorious for you. (Rg. 10-21-1) 
335 :(Swami Dayananda interprets this mantra as an address to the lady of the house.) 
336 :Bhadram no api vataya mano daksamuta kratum. Atha te sakhye andhaso vi vo made rana gavo na yavase vivaksase. Great by knowledge, awful by action, in his own right and by his own might, he maintains in power and majesty. Elevated and sublime, blazing brilliant, lord of horses and speed of motion, he wields the golden thunderbolt of power and force in both his hands for the beauty and dignity of life and the republic of humanity. (Rg. 1-81-4) 
337 :Indra, only that person who knows the science and technology of that horse-powered chariot which is perfect and fully capable of defence and safety against the enemy, would ride that prize-winning chariot of victory which would lead him to the conquest of territory and prosperity. Indra, yoke your horses (and come to join the yajna of defence and protection). (Rg.1-82-4) 
338 :Agnim tain manye yo vasurastam yam yanti dhenavah. Astam arvanta asavo stain nityaso vdjinam isarh stotrbhya a bhara. Agni is that power and presence of energy, I believe, which pervades everything and in which and by which all things abide and function. The cows abide in it, move by it and end up into it. Horses abide in it, move by it and end i nto it. So do al I fast movi ng streams and objects, permanent forms, and all forms of energy moveby itand retireinto it. 0 scholar of Agni, universal energy, produce and bring up food and energy for the celebrants and supplicants for Agni. This energy is originally set in motion by Agni, the Cosmic omnipotent Spirit. (In the mantra agni is described as astam, i.e., set into motion.) (Rg. 5-6-1) 
339 :Na tamamho na duritam devaso asta martyam. Sajosaso yam aryama mitro nayati varuno ati dvisah. Flow forth and consecrate, 0 Soma presence of divinity, as great ocean of life, father, generator and sustainer of divinities and ultimate haven and home of all the worlds of existence. (Rg. 9-109-4) 
340 :Indu, Soma spirit of refulgent divinity, blissful and poetically creative is the omniscient highest purifying and saving spirit and power for the sake of honour and joy on the basis of one's own Karmic performance. (Rg. 9-109-13) 
341 :W hile you are with us at heart, 0 Soma, spirit of constant peaceful life, we rejoice with you in the great common-wealth order of governance where, dynamic, pure and purifying, you ever advance to victories in honour, excellence and glory. (Rg. 9-110-2) 
342 :What for sure are these individual, specified, kindred, mortal and human life forces of Rudra, cosmic vitality, the soul, the commander, the destroyer of suffering, forces which, for advancemant, ride noble steeds like currents of wind? (Rg. 7-56-1) 
343 :Ague tam adyasvam na stomaih kratum na bhadrarh hrdisprsam. Rdhyama ta ohaih. Agni, mighty power of light and motion, with songs of praise and prayer and with holy acts of service offered in homage to you today, we augment, celebrate and glorify you, fast as nature's waves of energy, bright as intelligence and blissful as yajna, and dear as love closest to the heart. (Rg. 4-10-1) 
344 :Dynamic mortals keen to strive and win plunge into the creative yajna of self-refulgent Savita, lord of light and life's inspiration, manifest their power to the last drop of their energy and, relentlessly pressing forward, win the goal of divine felicity. Visvato davan visvato na a bhara yam tvd savisthamimahe. Infinitegiverfrom all sides, showeruswith divine blessings from the universe to our complete fulfillment. 0 lord most potent and beneficent, we pray for your favour and grace. This Lord Infinite and Absolute, adored every season, beneficent all seasons, Indra, most potent, I hear by name, I adore, I worship. with hymns of adoration and exalt him to break the demonic cloud of darkness and wantfor showers of rain and prosperity. (Rg. 5-31-4) 
345 :Indra, lord of protection, giver of joy invoked and worshipped by all, wise men create modes of divine knowledge and pious action for the attainment of your presence and glory, and Tvashta, maker and destroyer of suffering, makes and provides the blazing thunderbolt to dispel the darkness of evil and suffering.(Rg.5-31-4) 
346 :Peace, honour, prosperity is only for the man of charity, benevolence and self sacrifice. The man void of the discipline of liberality does not stir the process of love and charity, not even the circulation of wealth. Wealth and prosperity he does not even touch. Cows are always pure and sinless, they give. The generous are always pure, free from sin, they feed, support and sustain the world. Come, 0 Dawn, with holy light, with rays of blissful radiance on the chariot. The cows are on the move with the wealth of milk. (Rg. 10-172-1) 
347 :Indra, omnipotent lord, living close to you in the honey sweet abode of your realm, may we augment our wealth and excellence and meditate on your divine presence. M aruts, heroic devotees, chant devotional hymns and present the homage of worship and service to Indra who, youthful and renowned, sustains the world and responds to their devotion with joyous favour and spiritual elevation. To Indra, omniscient lord almighty, highest destroyer of evil, sin and darkness, sing and offer your songs of adoration which he loves, enjoys and happily accepts. Agni is self-conscious, enlightens, and, as a self- conducted power moving on its own waves of radiation, carries the fragrance of yajnic havi as well as the light of knowledge from the vedi all round. (Rg. 8-56-5) 
348 :Agni, lord of light, fire of life, you are our closest friend and saviour. Be good and gracious, the very spirit and security of the home for the inmates. (Rg. 5-24-1) 
349 :Like greatest of the great and munificent, wondrousAgni, Supremelightof life, holds the treasure jewels of existence which he liberally grants to the dedicated souls. Eternal sustainerof the universe, universal object of world adoration, you are beyond all doubt the same, first and foremost si nee eternity and the same even here and now. The dawn continuously removes the darkness of its sister night, by circular motion of its rise every morning through the succession of day and night. (Rg.10-172-4) 
350 :Let us proceed, study and win our goals, successfully and peacefully, across these regions of the world, study and harness electric energy, and let all divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity be favourable to us. (Rg. 10-157-1) 
351 :Like streams of water flowing by their natural course, 0 lord munificent, Indra, let your gifts of wealth, honour and excellence flow free for humanity. Thus do we offer ardent praise and seek to share divinefavour and inspiration fit for dedicated humanity and pray we may live happy a full hundred years blest with noble and heroic generations of progeny. (Rg. 6-17-15) 
352 :Mitra, the sun, and Varuna, the firmament, shower energy, fertilise the earth and ripen the grains, as the day and night refresh the vital spirit, so, we pray, mature and bring abundant food, energy and intelligence for us. Indra, lord omniscient and omnipotent, rules and enlightens the world. (Yaj. 36, 8) 
353 :The great and powerful sun drinks up the soma, essence of vital juices reinforced with herbal elixir, matured in three containers, i.e., the earth, the sky and the heaven of light, and distilled by light and wind while it shines and energises the essences. He who delights in energising this sun, greatest of the great in nature, to do great things, who blesses and continues to bless this blazing power of light is the eternal, ever true, self-refulgent Lord Supreme, blissful A nd he who would love to do great things vast and worthy of the great, he, true and bright as the moon, should serve and meditate on this lord of unbounded light and energy. (Rg. 2-22-1) 
354 :This mighty sun, benefactor of vast humanity, glorious, inspiration of poets, light of the world, law bound, radiates the flood of light in unison with dawn, and on the rise of the day, pure, immaculate, enlighted, perceptive people, cows and planets rise to the fresh light of a new day. Indra, lord of wealth and power, ruler of the world, come graciously from afar to us like this Agni who comes to the yajnic battles of life. Protector and promoter of truth and rectitude, friend and protector of the truthful and righteous, come to our home like the ruler. Joining you faithfully in this yajna of life, dedicated to holy action and endeavour, we invoke and invite you to join us. As children call upon the father to help them to food, sustenance and protection in their course of life and growth, so do we call upon you for safety and protection, great lord of power and prosperity, for victory in our battle of life. (Rg. 1-130-1) 
355 :That Indra, ruler of the world, I invoke and address, illustrious, pious and true, wielder of unopposed powers, and I pray may the most generous and adorable lord of thunderous power, in response to our voice, turn to us constantly and clear our paths of advancement for the achievement of wealth, power, honour and excellence of the world. (Rg. 8-97-13) 
356 :M ay my voi ce be heard! I have real i sed the energy and power of A gni, I ight and fi re, in full with my intellect and understanding. Then we opt for the divine force and power of nature and move on to the study and appl ication of the power of wind and electricity which, active at the centre of the sun, give us the newest and latest form of energy and power. May all our intellectual efforts and intelligential vision reach the forces of nature and analyse and discover their energy and powers. Let us reach there well with all our intellect and imagination and let our efforts benefit the noblest humanity. (Rg. 1-139-1) 
357 :This Soma spirit of the fighting force of divinity, protecting and purifying by its own victorious lustre of innate powers, overcomes all forces of jealousy and enmity as the sun dispels all darkness with its own rays of light. The stream of its radiance, realised and purifying, shines beautiful and blissful. The lustrous saviour spirit which pervades all existent forms of the world, goes forward pure and purifying with seven notes of its exalting voice and seven rays of light and seven pranic energies expressive of its mighty force. (Rg. 9-111-1) 
358 :I adore this self-refulgent Savita, life and light of existence, creator of heaven and earth, poetic high priest of creation yajna, generator and upholder of truth and law, treasure-hold of Iife'sjewels, universally loved and all-intelligent. Upon his manifest will, inert Prakrti rises and shines into the state of creation. This Savita of golden hands of glory, this holy actor, by his gracious will creates the lights of heaven and bliss. light and knowledge, spirit of life and heat and inspiration of noble action, yajaka, generous giver, treasure of wealth and universal shelter, inspirer and creator of courage and courageous action like the sun, omniscient lord of all that is born in existence, master of knowledge as the supreme scholar of the Veda, organiser of yajna with love and non-violence with divine knowledge and awareness, refulgent with heavenly light and power, loving and consuming with flames of fire, and, light the blaze of the purest and most powerful ghrta offered into the fire of yajna, physical, mental and spiritual all. 1 (Rg. 1-127-1) 
359 :Indra, lord of light, life and generosity, director of the cosmic dance of creation, that original, ancient act of yours admirable in the light and language of heaven performed for the sake of humanity which, by the omnipotence of Divinity, moves the pranic energies and causes the waters of life to flow may, we pray, with the power and splendour of Divinity, inspire the entire world of matter and energy, conquer impiety and bring us, 0 lord of a hundred yajnic gifts and actions, food and energy for body, mind and soul. (Rg. 2-22-4) 
360 :(Soma in the physical sense is an exhilarating drink, in the aesthetic sense it is ecstasy, in the psychic sense it is ananda, and in the spiritual sense it is elevation of the soul to the experience of divinity. It is the peace, purity and glory of life, any power physical, social or divine that leads to satyam (truth), shivam (goodness), and sundaram (beauty) of life, anything, power and person that gives us an experience of sacchidananda, the real, the intelligent and the blissful state of the life divine. In short, Soma is satyam, shivam and sundaram, the sat, the chit and the ananda of Iife. 11 is not restricted to a particular herb and a particular drink. The meaning of soma is open-ended on the positive side of life and living joy.) 
361 :The soma ecstasy that's yours, that is the highest love of our choice. Flow on, radiate, and sanctify us beyond satiation with lightdivineforthesoul, protector and saviour as you are of the holy and destroyer of sin and evil for the good. (Rg. 9-61-19) 
362 :Three Vedic voices of knowledge, action and prayer, loud and bold, enlighten, and inspire to goodness, organs of perception and volition, urge to good action, as earth and milch cows are profuse in fertility, and the lord of bliss, destroyer of suffering, manifests bright and blissful as life goes on in a state of prosperity. (Rg. 9-33-4) 
363 :The peace and pleasure of life's ecstasy in thought and action, and the expertise well founded on adamantine determination is created by Savita, the creator, like the flying ambition of the soul and it is settled in its seat at the heart's core in the personality. (Rg. 9-62-4) 
364 :Soma, cosmic soul, darling of the heavens and loved of enlightened people, poetic creator, immanent in his own creations, pervading all regions of the universe, moves around omnipresent, inspiring, creating and doing all those acts which are exclusively worthy of the omniscient and omnipotent creator. (Rg. 9-9-1) 
365 :May the streams of soma, nectar sweet and exhilarating, distilled and sanctified in yajna, flow for the safety, security and fame of our leading lights of honour, power and excellence. (Rg. 9-32-1) 
366 :J ust as waves of water rise to the moon and great men strive for things of beauty and goodness, so do inspired learned sages, lovers of dynamic peace and goodness, move forward to realise the supreme power and Spirit of the Vedic hymns. (Rg. 9-33-1) 
367 :Soma, lord of purity and generosity, light and splendour, served and realised through yajnic life, protect and purify us, help us join the community of honour and excellence, ward off and eliminate all malignity, jealousy and enmity from our life. (Rg. 9-61-28) 
368 :Soma, lord of bliss, is self-refulgent and holy, purest and most purifying, omniscient, dearest love of the poets and celebrants, and wi sest of the w ise. C reati ng the dynamic world of matter, energy and mind, he abides like the master of the universal chariot. (Rg. 9-64-10) 
369 :Vibrant heroes blest with the soma spirit of peace, progress and brilliance, pure and potent, inspired with ambition for lands, cows and culture, horses, advancement and achievement, and advancement of the brave generations of humanity move forward with the spirit of generous creativity. (Rg. 9-64-4) 
370 :Let Soma, progressive, active and zealous power dedicated to humanity and divinity, create the light and culture of universal expansive order from the light of heaven, sublime, awful and beautiful as the light and resounding roar of thunder and lightning. (Rg. 9-61-16) 
371 :H oney streams of soma distilled and consecrated by the hallowed voice of the Veda flow round for the joy of mankind. (Rg. 9-10-4) 
372 :Pervading and reposing in transcendence over the dynamics of this expansive ocean of the universe, bearing and sustaining this poetic creation, the omniscient poet creator, Soma, lord of peace, joy and bliss, rolls and rules the world with pleasure and grace. (Rg. 9-14-1) 
373 :Soma, spirit of beauty, grace and glory, divinely created, nobly born, zealous, destroyer of negativity, beatified and celebrated in songs of divine voice, the noblest powers of nature and humanity adore, share and enjoy. (Rg. 9-61-13) 
374 :Soma, spirit of universal purity and purification, all watching, faces and overcomes all adversaries of the carnal world. Sages celebrate and glorify the vibrant all prevailing spirit with songs of adoration. (Rg. 9-40-1) 
375 :Taking over his positions of office, the conscrated leader, pioneer and brilliant ruler presides over lands and affairs of the order moving forward and winning all wealth, honours, excellence and graces of the world for the people, exhorted and exalted by them. (Rg.9-62-19) 
376 :J ust as a passionate champion warrior shoots to the goal straight, so does Soma, potent spirit of peace, purity and glory, invoked and celebrated with devotion in the purity of heart and soul, descends to the centre core of the heart without delay. (Rg. 9-36-1) 
377 :We adore the ceaseless radiations of divinity which, like restless rays of the sun, blazing with lustrous glory, move and shower on the earth and dispel the dark cover of the night. (Rg. 9-41-1) 
378 :you give light to the sun, by the same light and energy inspire the will and actions of humanity and purify us. (Rg. 9-63-7) 
379 :Lord of the joy of existence, for constant conversion, elimination and destruction of negativity you protect and promote the creative, structural and developmental forces of naturein great evolutionary dynamics on way to positive growth and progress. (Rg. 9-61-22) 
380 :Ay a viti pari srava yas ta indo madesva. Avahan navatir nova. Light of the light of heaven, treasure-hold of world's wealth, with wealth, food and energy for body, mind and soul arise and manifest in the pure heart, inspiring it to a state of peace and benediction. (Rg. 9-52-1) 
381 :Soma, Spirit of universal peace and bliss, is generous and virile, destroyer of suffering, great, noble gui de as a f ri end, and prod ai ms his presence everyw here as he shines glorious with the sun. (Rg. 9-2-6) 
382 :A te daks am mayobhuvam vahnimadya vrmmahe. Pdntam a puru sprham. Today here and now, we choose for ourselves and pray for your power, peace and bliss, light and firewhich is universally loved, all protective, promotive and all sanctifying. (Rg. 9-65-28) 
383 :Soma, Spirit of peace, beauty and bliss, saving, rejoicing, fulfilling, flows on. The stream of delight exhilarating for body, mind and soul flows on full of bliss. Crossing over the hurdles of life, delighted all over, the celebrant goes on. (Rg. 9-58-1) 
384 :fluent energy, let a thousandfold wealth of virility, courage and creativity, pure and purifying, flow to us and vest us with food, energy, fame and excellence of life. (Rg. 9-63-1) 
385 :In consequence of the will divine, the eternal particles of Prakrti move and assume new forms of existence in evolution, and for the sake of light they create the light of stars. (Rg. 9-23-2) 
386 :Soma, spirit of divine power and peace of purity, most potent and most refulgent, come roaring at the speed and force of thunder and abide in the flames of yajna and heart of the faithful and purify and sanctify the soul. (Rg. 9-65-19) 
387 :Shower in streams of purity and power and bless us with food, energy and fulfilment, adored and exalted as you are by sages, scholars and thoughtful devotees. 0 lord of bliss and beauty, come and, with the light and joy of your presence, sanctify our senses and mind, vision and intelligence. (Rg. 9-64-13) 
388 :too, pray flow in exciting streams of joy and bless us with peace and purity. (Rg. 9-6-1) 
389 :This Soma, lordly Spirit of peace and joy, feels great by this yajnic act of homage and, happy and exalted, loves to advance and exalt the celebrants. (Rg. 9-47-1) 
390 :This Soma, divine spirit of action, honour and joy, isall watching, all beneficent, all inspiring, moving and dynamic, ever wakeful, setting in motion the flow on for attainment of vast achievable success and fulfilment. (Rg. 9-62-10) 
391 :Pra na indo make tu na urmim na bibhrad arsasi. Abhi devah ayasyah. D estroy i ng the d estroy ers, el i m i n ati n g th e sel f i sh, ungenerous hoarders and parasites, Soma, divine creativity in nature and humanity attains to its yajnic end and aim in the existential order created by omnipotent Indra. (Rg. 9-61-25) 
392 :From here onward sprinkle Soma with love and service, Soma, the spirit of beauty, peace and joy of life, Soma, realised with best of thoughts, effort and determined discipline of meditation, Soma which bears the best materials for creative yajna of personal and social development, Soma which is the leading light of life, realised within in the heart and our Karmas performed in life. (Rg. 9-107-1) 
393 :Soma, invoked by celebrants, manifests with blissful inspiring powers of protection and promotion and, saving, watching, fascinating, goes forward, rushing, compelling, in an impetuous stream like waves of energy, and it also goes forward by a stream of mild motion, soothing and refreshing. (Rg. 9-107-8) 
394 :Tavaham soma rarana sakhya indo dive dive. Puruni babhro ni caranti mam ava paridhim- rati tarn ihi. Intelligent and dedicated lovers of Soma refine and sublimate their pleasurable joy of the heart and emotion, direct it to divinity on top of the existential ocean of daily business and, thoughtful, ecstatic and divinely oriented, experience the heavenly ecstasy of Soma as in samadhi. (Rg. 9-107-14) 
395 :Pure and all purifying, 0 Soma, spirit of peace and bliss, ever awake and awakening with your eternal consciousness, all protective and promotive, dearest in the heart of thecherished loving soul, you are the vibrant awareness of omniscience and the very life energy of life. 0 Spirit of peace, joy and divine bliss, pray bless our yajna of life with the honey sweets of existence. (Rg. 9-107-6) 
396 :Soma, joy of existence, invoked and realised, flows purifying and consecrating for Indra, the vibrant soul, in a thousand streams of ecstasy and overflows the heart and soul of the devotee. That Spirit of the Purifying, energising and inspiring currents of ecstasy and nourishment for the senses, will, intellect and imagination flow by stream and shower at the speed of winds to the holy heart of the sagely celebrant.(Rg. 9-107-25) 
397 :Pra tu drava pari kosam ni sida nrbhih punano abhi vajam arsa. Asva/n na tva vajinam marjayanto ccha barlii rasanabhir nay anti. The brilliant poet, singing like an inspired fiery power divine, reveals the origin of nature's divinities and the rise of human brilliancies. Great is his commitment, inviolable his discipline, bonded ishewith purity as a brother, having chosen light of the sun and shower of clouds for his element, and he goes forward proclaiming the message of his vision by the paths of piety. (Rg. 9-97-7) 
398 :Soma inspires three orders of speech: practical speech that carries on the daily business of life, the thought that conceives of the vibrant immanent divine presence, and the deeper language of silence which is the mode of transcendent reality. The language operations of daily business move in search of the master source of world mystery as in science and philosophy, and the speech of thought and imagination and of love and worship moves to the presence of peace and bliss, Soma. (The three speeches in Vedic language are Ida, Sarasvati, and M ahi or Bharati as described in Rgveda 1, 13, 9 and Yajurveda 21, 19. Explained another way these are the language of the Rks or knowledge, Yajus or karma, and Samans or worship.) (Rg. 9-97-34) 
399 :Divine Soma, moved and energised by the surge of golden impulse, joins its potency with the senses and mind, and thus seasoned and empowered, vibrant with vitality, it moves to the holiness of the heart like a sanative, or as a priest going to a yajnic enclosure, seat and anchor of sensitive visionary powers of humanity. (Rg. 9-97-1) 
400 :Soma, spirit of divine peace, power and generous creativity, flows and purifies universally. It is generator of heavens, maker of the earth and creator of the nobilities of sagely wisdom, generator of fire, maker of the stars, manifester of its own omnipotence, and manifester of the omnipresence of its own self in expansive space. (Rg. 9-96-5) 
401 :The celebrants' songs of adoration in honour of the generous, virile, adorable and life bearing Soma, sustainer of three worlds arise in homage of love and faith. Holding precious treasures and powers of the world like Varuna, all covering space, and the ocean holding the deep seas, the wielder of world jewels bestows gifts of choice on mankind. (Rg. 9-90-2) 
402 :Soma, prime cause of the laws and world of existence, unfathomable as ocean, taking on by itself countless causes of existence in the vast vault of space and time, roaring and generating the evolving stars, planets and forms of life, is the ruling power of the universe. Potent and generous, infinite, creative and generative, refulgent Soma pervades the immaculate, sacred and protective universe and on top of it expands it and transcends. (Rg. 9-97-40) 
403 :and sustained invoked in meditation, abiding in the heart core of the soul, pure and purifying, vibrates loud and bold. Served and adored and celebrated by devotees, it renders the senses, mind and intelligence pure and immaculate and then it gives rise to spontaneous songs of praise offered with complete surrender and self- sacrifice. (Rg. 9-95-1) 
404 :Indra, omnipotent generous creator and ruler of the universe, this Soma is your honeyed shower of beneficence and grace which profusely flows over and across the immaculate world of life. May this Soma, giving a thousand boons in a hundred forms of infinite values, a mighty victorious divine force, abide by us and bless the universal vedi of human life with eternal grace. (Rg. 9-87-4) 
405 :Flow, purify and bless, 0 Soma, rich in the honey sweets of life, high priest of cosmic yajna, reflecting in the cosmic processes of evolution on top of protective nature. Flow and abide in the depth of holy hearts deep in love and faith divine, 0 spirit most exhilarating, ecstatic and i nfi nite source of fulfi I ment for I ndra, potent vibrant soul, lover of divine glory. (Rg. 9-96-13) 
406 :Soma, heroic brave leader, warrior and commander, marches at the head of chariots, ardently ambitious for positive gains for the commonalty, his army follows with joyous enthusiasm. Thus nobly fulfilling the divine call of I ndra for the advancement and excellence of the friends of humanity, Soma takes on the robe and role of peace and protection and the arms for the defence of humanity. (Rg. 9-96-1) 
407 :Sing and celebrate, let us honour the divinities and exhort Soma for great victory and achievement of wealth, honour and excellence. Sweet and lovable, Soma rises to the protective position of choice and, loving the di vi niti es, it abi des i n the ri ght positi on at the centre. (Rg. 9-97-4) 
408 :Inspiring the celebrants to action and achievement, creator of heaven and earth, winning strength and victory like a chariot warrior, moving to the karma-yogi, sharpening and calibrating weapons of warlike action, bearing all wealth and power of theworld in hands, may the spirit of peace and power come and bless us. (Rg. 9-90-1) 
409 :If the language of the mind in words of love of the vibrant sage of worshipful devotion, established in the beauty and splendour of the supreme spirit and law of the universe, were to visualise the picture-presence of Soma, ultimate sustenance of life, then all perceptions, thoughts and imaginations, loving and faithful, would move and concentrate into that presence of the choicest, most loved and beatific master vibrating in the heart core of the soul. (Rg. 9-97-22) 
410 :simultaneous sister faculties of the self-controlled, self- established yogi together concentrate, communicate and glorify Hari, Soma spirit of divine joy that eliminates want and suffering, and the Spirit, pervading the vibrations of divinity, the light born of the sun, radiates like a constant wave, reaches and settles in the heart core of the blessed soul, the seat of divinity. (The faculties are faculties of perception, thought and will which normally wander over theworld of outside reality but which are controlled, concentrated and inverted in meditation and focussed on the presence of divinity within, and then the presence reveals itself in all its refulgent glory.) (Rg. 9-93-1) 
411 :As people exert themselves for the achievement of light and brilliance and when their mind, thoughts and higher intelligence concentrate on this Soma, divine spiritof peaceand inspiring brilliance, for illumination, then the Soma spirit, choosing, loving and enlightening the intelligence, thought and creativity of the devotee, radiates into the mind and spirit of the devotee for the augmentation and elevation of the thought, imagination and sensibility of the celebrant. (Rg. 9-94-1) 
412 :Indu, brilliant Soma, energetic and victorious, pure and purifying, vibrant and dynamic, creating strength, patience and endurance for the soul's joy, is ever on the move. It destroys evil, prevents all negativities and opposition and casts them far off, and, giving wealth, honour and excellence of the best order of our choice, rules as the brilliant creator, controller and dispenser of strength, courage, power and lifesaving vitality in existence. (Rg. 9-97-10) 
413 :Generous, refulgent Soma spirit of beauty, peace and glory, sanctify us by these streams of grace. I n the ocean depths of this honourable universe, energise and move all forms of wealth and peaceful settlements and consecrate us in the lake divine. Spirit of the expansive universe, dynamic like the stormy winds, high-priest of cosmic yajna for all, bless us with a settled state of humanity in the vibrant system of a volatile world. (Rg. 9-97-52) 
414 :Soma, potent absol ute, generated the M ahat mode of Prakrti, Mother Nature, which is the womb of all elements, energies and forms of existence and which comprehends all perceptive, intelligential and psychic powers as well. And then the creative-generative lord of evolutionary action, Soma, vested lustre and energy in Indra, the soul, and, lord of light as it is, Soma vested light in the sun. (Rg. 9-97-41) 
415 :A s in a chariot race, so in the progressive business of organised society, an eloquent speaker, prominent thinker and manager of imaginative and decisive first order is appoi nted to take on the busi ness of governance and administration. Ten cooperative persons capable of independent thinking, working in perfect unison like sister powers or ten pranas or ten senses of perception and volition, in the house, assist the leader on top of the protective social order of yajnic sanctity. (Rg. 9-91-1) 
416 :Apam ived urmayas tartturanah pra mariisa irate somam accha. Namasyantir upa ca yanti sam caca visantyusatlr usantam. Like waves of the sea pressing onward with force and speed, the songs of adoration rise and radiate with love to Soma. Expressive of ardent love, faith and reverence, they reach and joi n the di vi ne presence which too is equally ardent and anxious to receive them. It is Pusha, life-sustaining and nourishing protector, wealth and honour of the world, power and the glory, Soma that is pure and purifying, ever going forward with the world. It is the master, sustainer and ruler of the vast expansive universe and i 11 umi nates both heaven and earth. (Rg. 9-101-7) 
417 :Filtered, felt and cleansed, honey sweet soma streams, pure and exhilarating, flow for Indra, the soul, and may the exhilarations reach you, noble favourites of divinity. (Rg. 9-101-4) 
418 :Streams of Soma flow for us, brilliant, eloquent and expansive, friendly, inspiring, free from sin, intellectually creative and spiritually illuminative. (Rg. 9-101-10) 
419 :Indu, divine spirit of peace, power, beauty and grace, move and bless us to achieve wealth, honour and excellence of high order, universally loved and valued, a thousandfold sustaining, mighty powerful, all challenging bright and finally victorious. (Rg. 9-98-1) 
420 :J ust as young mothers love and caress the first born baby in early age, so do people free from mal i ce and j eal ousy take to Soma, meditati ve real i sati on of divinity, dear favourite love of Indra, the soul. (Rg. 9-100-1) 
421 :For the lovely bold Soma, devotees wield and stretch the manly bow, and joyous celebrants of heaven and earth before the vi brants create and sing exalting songs of power and purity in honour of the life giving spirit of divinity. (Rg. 9-99-1) 
422 :Ten psychic powers with the best of their potential adore and exalt that dear divinity, omniscience itself, who, omnipresent, pervades and rejoices with all divinities of the world with divine ecstasy. (Rg. 9-98-7) 
423 :That silent voice of the generative illuminative Soma of divine food, energy and enlightenment for the dedicated devotee, the ordinary mortal does not perceive. 0 yajakas, ward off the clamours and noises which disturb the meditative yajna as men of wisdom ward them off to save their yajna. (Rg. 9-101-13) 
424 :Soma, spirit of life and joy of existence, mighty, infinite, omnipresent, pervades and vitalises all dear beautiful systems of waters and light, expansive and exalted therein. Greater than the great, all watching, it rides the grand chariot of the sun which comprehends and illuminates the whole world. (Rg. 9-75-1) 
425 :May the bright and blissful soma streams of divinity, self-moved and self-inspired, life-givine, gracious dispellers of darkness and suffering, inspire us to move forward in the vast yajnas of celestial proportions. Let the enemies of our food and energy perish. Let the saboteurs be destroyed. Let our hopes and plans be realised and fulfilled. (Rg. 9-79-1) 
426 :This soma, blissful spirit of the universe, full of honey sweets of joy, vibrates and reveals itself aloud in the ananda-maya kosha at the heart's core of the soul, potent as thunderbolt of Indra, beauty, power and bliss incarnate, most beautiful and vigorous of all beauty and power itself. All voices of speech replete with the spirit of truth and divinity, generous and overflowing with liquidity of meaning and spirit of divinity and divine law flow from it, about it and to it like milch cows overflowing with milk for the calf. (Rg. 9-77-1) 
427 :I ndu, Soma, light of life and divine ecstasy, goes forward to the sacred heart of the devotee and, like a friend of friends, destroys contradictions, confirms complementarities and advances human growth. Thus, just as youthful mortals go with their lady love, join and protect them, and live a full life with vows kept within the bounds of discretion and the law, so does Soma in the sacred heart inspire the loved soul as a friend in covenant by a hundred paths of human possibilities of growth and advancement within the bounds of Dharma. The Lord does not break the promise ever.(Rg.9-86-16) 
428 :Soma, joyous spirit of the universe, sustainer of the regions of light, constant doer, eternal delight and bliss of divinities, perfect omnipotent power, sole worthy of worship by humanity vibrates omnipresent, purifies and sanctifies the life of existence. Destroyer of want and suffering, ever creative, with its own powers spontaneously, like energy itself creates movement and Generous inspirer of the intelligent and meditative souls, Soma pervades, flows and purifies. Omniscient and all watching, it is the illuminator of the day, the dawn and the sun. Life energy of floods, rivers, oceans and the seas, it vibrates in alI forms of existence. It loves the sacred heart and with love it enters and blesses the heart core of the pious and powerful soul of humanity. Such is Soma celebrated by the sages and wise scholars. (Rg. 9-86-19) 
429 :Thrice seven cows, creative powers of natural evolution, generate the milky strain of vitality added to the evolving reality in the service of the creator Soma in the cosmic yajna in absolute time and space, Soma who also created four other beautiful orders of existence for the glory and sanctity of existence which grows by the laws of cosmic dynamics. (Rg. 9-70-1) 
430 :(The seven cows may be interpreted as the seven evolutes of Prakrti: mahan, ahankara and five subtle elements of ether or akasha, energy or vayu, fire or agni, water or apah, and earth or prthivi. Three are orders of sattva or thought, rajas or energy, and tamas or matter. This makes the thrice seven, the four other beautiful orders of existence may be interpreted as mana (mind), buddhi (discriminative intelligence), chitta (memory) and ahankara (l-sense or existential personality). Another interpretation could be the four Vedas, knowledge, the corresponding order of existence in terms of awareness and expression. Soma, self-refulgent supreme creative spirit of the universe, virile and generous, dispeller of darkness and deprivation, regal and gracious like a ruler, selfmoves, vibrating to the generation of stars and planets. Itself pure, purifying and sanctifying, it moves to manifest i n the heart of i mperishabl e P rakrti as it chooses and, like the sun that warms and fertilises, it enlivens the generative centre of life as its own womb of manifestive existence. Thus does Soma create and generate the universe. (Rg. 9-82-1) 
431 :Seekers of the light and soma sweetness of divinity, themselves noble and refined with honey sweets of culture, manners and holy language, approach the refulgent and generous divine lord like calves going to mother cows. Sitting on the holy grass of yajna at dawn, eloquent of tongue and clear of understanding, they recei ve and treasure the nectar stream of soma, peace and bliss of divinity, as calves receive milk streaming from the udders or as dawns receive radiations of light from the sun over the night's darkness. (Rg. 9-68-1) 
432 :They realise it in the vibrant soul, diversify the presence in various statements of definition and communication, and integrate the experience and the statements in the awareness of its absolute glory. They love and adore the soul of cosmic yajna and worship it with honey sweets of homage in acts of soma yajna. In these ways of awareness, thoughts, words and deeds, do lovers of the golden glory of soma realise and integrate with the all watching universal power and presence vaulting on top of their waves of consciousness with incessant showers of bliss divine. (Rg. 9-86-43) 
433 :Vast and expansive is your holy creation of existence and the voice divine, 0 Brhaspati, lord of expansive universe. You are the master and supreme controller who pervade and transcend its parts from the particle to the whole. The immature man who has not passed through the crucibles of discipline cannot reach to that presence, but the mature and seasoned ones who sti 11 mai ntai n the ordeal of f i re and abi de by the presence attain to it and the divine joy. (Rg. 9-83-1) 
434 :May these realised, cleansed and confirmed, blessed, beautiful and brilliant virtues and sanskars touching the bounds of divine bliss, emerging and risen in the mind, well reach and seep into the heart core of the soul completely and permanently. (Rg. 9-106-1) 
435 :awake, brilliant and enlightening, streaming on and on for Indra, the soul, bear and bring the light and fire of the sun and vision of heaven. (Rg. 9-106-4) 
436 :Sakhaya a ni sldata punanaya pra gayata. Sisurh na yajhaih pari bhusata sriye. Come friends, sit on the yajna vedi, sing and celebrate Soma, pure and purifying spirit of life, and with yajna exalt him like an adorable power for the grace and glory of life. (Rg. 9-104-1) 
437 :M aker of stars and planets, inspiring the light and law of the dynamics of existence, dear adorable giver of fulfilment, Soma rules over both spirit and nature, heaven and earth. (Rg. 9-102-1) 
438 :Soma, pure and purifying, protective and blissful, flowing by streams and sanctifying, roaring with ancient and original hymns of divine adoration, rushes to the heart core of the distinguished soul. (Rg. 9-106-10) 
439 :Sing rising songs of adoration in honour of Soma, pure and purifying, omniscient and inspiring ordainer of I ife, and offer the songs as homage of yaj ni c gratitude. Soma feels pleased with enlightened songs of love and faith. (Rg. 9-103-1) 
440 :Our songs of adoration celebrate and exalt you as creator, knower and giver of peace, power, wealth and honours of the world. I ndeed, with thoughts, words and vision, we glorify your power and presence as it emerges in our experience. (Rg. 9-104-4) 
441 :The beauteous and beatific divine saviour spirit of Soma vibrates, purifies and flows with tremendous force, casting off all crookedness and contradictions, and overflowing with valour, honour and excellence for the celebrants and their heroic progeny for generations. (Rg. 9-106-13) 
442 :In the protected heart core of the blessed soul overt I ow i ng w ith honey j oy, the Soma presence vibrates, and hymnal voices of the seer sages in seven Vedic musical metres adore and glorify the divine presence in ecstatic response to the guiding spirit of divinity. (Rg. 9-103-3) 
443 :This treasure trove of the wealth, honour and excellence of existence, overflowing with honey sweets of ecstasy in a thousand streams, virile, brilliant and generous, the sages worship and they receive the milky grace of divinity for life and joy. (Rg. 9-108-11) 
444 :Sa sunve yo vasunam yo ray dm aneta ya idanam. Somo yah suksitinam. ruler guide of all forms of wealth, honour and excellence, lands, knowledge and awareness, and of happy homes is thus realised in its divine manifestation.(Rg.9-108-13) 
445 :It is that Soma, most joyous spirit of life's beauty, which, when realised by controlled minds of choice meditative order, flows pure and purifying by the stream of ecstasy, playful and exalting like waves of the sea. (Rg. 9-108-5) 
446 :You who with your might and lustre break open the cloud and release the streams of water from the womb of the cloud, who pervade and extend your power over the vault of the universe, pray come like a warrior in arms and break open the paths of progress in knowledge and advancement. Spirit omnipotent, break open the paths of light. (Rg. 9-108-6) 
447 :Indra, lord of noblest virtue and knowledge, bear and bring us that best and most lustrous food for the nourishment of body and mind which we cherish and by which, 0 wondrous hero of golden helmet and wielder of thunder in hand, you fill, fulfil and replenish both the earth and the sky upto heaven. (Rg. 6-46-5) 
448 :Indra is the sovereign ruler of the moving world and her people on the earth. Whatever various and manifold wealth there is on the earth, he alone is the master ruler. A nd therefrom he gives profusely of wealth, honour and excellence to the generous man of charity, inspires our potential strength and success, and when he is closely adored in meditation, he reveals his presence to our direct vision and experience.(Rg.7-27-3) 
449 :This abundant, vast and gracious charity of Indra, this divine bliss of the self-refulgent lord, is dear and adorable among the generous people. M ay this charity and grace of the lord flow to us. Varuna, dearest lord of our choice, we pray, loosen the highest, middling and the lowest bonds of our sin and slavery so that, 0 Lord Supreme of light, free from sin and slavery and living within the rules of your law, we may be fit for the attai nment of the ulti mate freedom of Moksha. (Rg. 1-24-15) 
450 :I am one, even alone. M ay the heavenly powers inspire me, this self, to rise to the strength, nobility and generosity of the great. Soma, lord of peace and purity, power and piety, creator, controller and commander of the entire wealth of life, flow on by the dynamics of nature and bless us for the benefit of power and glory, yajna and unity among the yajakas, judgement and right values and the vibrant forces of law and order. (Rg. 9-61-12) 
451 :Soma is the lord of humanity and the earth. By virtue of him and of him, we ask and pray for all food, energy, honour and excellence for humanity, serving him and sharing all the benefits together. (Rg. 9-61-11) 
452 :I am the food of life for life. I am the first born of the divinities of the eternal yajna of the immortal flow of existence, prime of value for the divinities. He that gives me, i.e., food, to others for sustenance of life thereby protects and promotes I if e. A nd I eat up as food the man who eats food only for himself, without caring for others. Only you as mind and electric energy bear, hold and maintain in circulation this brightvital liquid energy as sap and blood in the dark and red life sustaining veins and arteries of living forms. (Rg. 8-93-13) 
453 :Lighting up the dawns, stars and planets in space, the sun, prime and abundant source of light, warmth of life and waters of sustenance, giver of food and energy shines over the regions of the world. By the light, power and causal effects of it on other objects in existence such as planets and satellites, scholars of science do their astronomical calculations, and parental, kind and studious scholars studying humanity and divinity realise the nature and character of Soma, the original seed of life and source of energy for the world of existence. (Rg. 9-83-3) 
454 :energy of vayu or maruts, and Indra, the solar energy, the bond of unity and sustenance in things, co-existent synthesis of equal and opposite complementarities of positive and negative, activiser of speech, lord of the thunderbolt and the golden light of the day and the year. (Rg. 1-7-2) 
455 :Indra, lord of light and omnipotence, in a thousand battles of life and prize contests, protect us with bright blazing ways of protection and advancement. (Rg. 1-7-4) 
456 :Vasishtha, the most brilliant seeker and teacher, a man of versatile mind and boundless possibilitieswho was gifted with a radiative spirit and passion for enlightenment, received the pure, applied, beatific and life giving Word of the Veda, the first, original and eternal gift of the lord of omniscience into his yajna of cosmic creation, from Agni, sustainer of the light of knowledge, Vayu, vibrant sage with passion and strong will, Savita, i.e., A ditya, brilliant and inspiring like the sun, and Angiras, the sage inspiring as omnipresent Vishnu and breath of life. (Rg. 10-181-1) 
457 :(This Vasishtha, the brilliant disciple of the four sages, A gni, Vayu, A ditya and A ngira, who then became the teacher of the Vedas, was Brahma. Swami Brahmamuni explains this interpretation of this mantra in his commentary on Rgveda and cites authoritative evidence from the Brahmana works. Swami Dayananda explains the cosmic process of creative evolution and Vedic revelation in his Introduction to his Commentary on the Vedas, Rgvedadi Bhashya Bhumika, saying on Vedic and ancient authority that the Vedas were first revealed to four sages: Rgveda to Agni, Yajurveda to Vayu, SamavedatoAditya, andAtharva vedatoAngira. Brahma, the brilliant disciple and later the inspired teacher, learnttheVeda from these four sages and passed on this knowledge to his disciples.) 
458 :Vayu, scholar of the dynamics of the winds, self- controlled with your disciplined mind and senses, drying upthemists of ignoranceand confusion with the brilliant light of knowledge, come to the brilliant light of knowledge, come to the house of the yajamana who has distilled the soma. Universally moving you are, I invite you come in person. This soma is for you. (Rg. 2-41-2) 
459 :May Parameshthi Prajapati, highest creator and sustainer of his children, vest and augment in me the honour, glory and life promoting spirit of self-sacrifice and yajnic creativity like the light of the sun in heaven. Soma, lord of light, health and energy of life, may al I the waters, foods and vital iti es of exi stence, anti dotes to the negativities of existence come to you in abundance, and may all those abundant and powerful drinks, foods and energies of yours come to us and augment our vitality to fight out the negative and cancerous forces of Iife. Lord of life, thus strengthened by nature in the regions of light and blessing usfor health and immortality, bear for us the best of foods and energies of life for growth and for victory in the battles of life. (Rg. 1-91-18) 
460 :Soma, lord of creation and evolution, you create all these herbs of the world, you create the waters, the mind and senses, the cows, the earths and all else that moves. You create, expand and pervade the skies, and you dispel the dark and cover the spaces with light. (Rg. 1-91-22) 
461 :I invoke and worship Agni light of life, self- refulgent lord of the universe, foremost leader and inspirer, blazing light of yajnic creation, high-priest of cosmic dynamics, controller of natural evolution, and most generous giver of the treasures of life. (Rg.1-1-1) 
462 :First they study, reflect and meditate on the seven ultimate forms of mother speech and thus realise and know it in the essence through word, meaning and the self-existent reality behind the word. And having realised the content of divine speech, they celebrate the red lights of the dawn bearing and revealing that lord of speech manifesting by the splendour of the dawn of knowledge. (Rg. 4-1-16)) 
463 :Some of these streams of water and currents of energy flow together. Some others flow close by them, and all of them together join and flow into the ocean to fullness. And these clear and purest streams of water and water energy all round abide by that pure, bright and blazing child of the waters, imperishable agni, fire and electric energy of the water power. (This mantra describes the dynamic circuit flow of energy and its imperishable form in the state of conservation.) (Rg. 2-35-3) 
464 :The night that folds the waking world into sleep has been restful. Now there comes the youthful maiden of the morning, lovely dawn, stirring, radiating and unfurling the flag lights of the day. Praksasya vrsno arusasya nu mahah pra no vaco vidatha jatavedase. Vaisvanaraya matir navyase sucih soma iva pavate carur agnaye. Spontaneously I sing and celebrate the knowledge and omnipotence of Jataveda, omniscient lord creator, omnipresent, generous, refulgent and merciful. The holy thoughts and words of the song flow ever fresh, pure, soothing and sanctifying like the streams of soma in honour of the universal lord and leading light of the world. (Rg. 6-8-1) 
465 :Yaso ma dyava-prthivi yaso mendra-brhaspati. Yaso bhagasya vindatu yaso ma prati- mucyatam. Yasasvya 3syali sam sado ham pra- v adit a syam. M ay heaven and earth bless me with honour. M ay Indra and Brhaspati, ruler and the sagely scholar bless me with honour. May the honour and excellence of power and prosperity come to me. Let honour and grace never forsake me. And let me be an honourable speaker of this august assembly. I recite and celebrate the first and highest exploits of I ndra, lord of the thunderbolt, refulgent ruler, which he, like the sun, performs with the shooting rays of His light. He breaks down the cloud like an enemy, releases the waters and opens the paths of mountain streams. (The ruler too, similarly, breaks down the enemies holding up the powers of the nation for movement, releases the energies and resources of the nation, and carves out the paths of progress.) (Rg. 1-32-1) 
466 :I am Agni, by birth present in all that is born in existence. My eye is the light of yajna fed on ghrta, and my mouth is nectar as I speak the Word. I am the refulgence of the sun. I hold the earth and skies and the heavens and three principles of nature, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas of P rakrti. I pervade and transcend the spaces. I am eternal, I am the heat and vitality of life, and I am truly the fragrant havi of the cosmic yajna (since I am in nature and nature is in me). (Rg. 3-26-7) 
467 :Agni protects the friend and favourite, it protects the ampl itude of the earth i n orbit, and the fI ight of bi rds. M ighty powerful, it protects the rainbow colours of light in space and the orbit of the sun in the galaxy. N oble, elevated and sublime, it protects the pleasure and amusement of the noble people who are brilliant and generous. (Rg. 3-5-5) 
468 :Agni, self-refulgent light and splendour of the world, yourflamesinthevedi, like tongue in the mouth, rise, roll and blaze. 0 radiant Agni, lord of the world's wealth and excellence, bring us wealth, honour and excellence with the nutriments of life and the light of life that we may see the world and the life divine. M ay spri ng be pi easant, may summer be pi easant, may the rains be pi easant, may autumn be pleasant, may winter be pleasant and may late winter too be pleasant. Purusha, the cosmic soul of existence, is Divinity personified, of a thousand heads, a thousand eyes and a thousand feet. It pervades the universe wholly and entirely and, having pervaded and comprehended the universe of ten Prakrtic constituents, It transcends the world of existence. (Rg. 10-90-1) 
469 :Three parts higher rises the Purusha above the universe in which only one measure of Its glory manifests again and again, pervading all the material and biological world and thence remains transcendent over the universe. (Rg. 10-90-4) 
470 :All this that is and was and shall be is Purusha ultimately. The entire worlds of existence are but one fourth of It. Three parts of Its mystery are in the transcendental heaven of immortality beyond the universe. (Rg. 10-90-2 & 3) 
471 :So great is the grandeur and glory of It, and still the Purusha is greater, sovereign over immortality and ruler of what expands by living food. (Rg. 10-90-3& 2) 
472 :From Purusha arose Virat, the cosmic idea, the blue-print in terms of Prakrti .The Purusha manifests in the Virat and remains sovereign over it. Though manifested, it exceeds, transcends and then creates the universe and the world regions for forms of existence. (Rg. 10-90-5) 
473 :Indra, self-refulgent lord of power and splendour, your rays of light and your radiant powers of attraction and repulsion are great and blissful. Poets, men of vision and imagination, masters of thought, word and the divine voice adore you as divine. Give us the glory that is in the golden sun, the lustrous vigour that is in the radiant rays, and recreate and rejuvenate us with that light and splendour which abides in the eternal truth and sublimity of Divinity That courage, patience and fortitude, Indra, give us, that lustre and splendour whose greatness, 0 lord superabundant, you rule, control and release in showers. Likeouryajnic performancein life, bless us with wealth, honour and excellence and imperishable food, energy and enlightenment for body, mind and soul. And raise us to the height where we may face, fight and subdue our enemies when darkness, sin and evil surround us. Arise, 0 cows, radiant rays and green earth, nature's creative and productive powers of all forms of double potential along with abundant virility and fertility for the generation of future progeny. And may this world be exuberant, vast and high for you, and may these waters here flow sweet and energizing for you to drink. Agni, heat and energy of lifedivine, giveusgood health and long age with purity, create and bring us food, energy and excellence, and throw off and keep away all evils and negativities from us. (Rg. 9-66-19) 
474 :May the mighty refulgent sun hold, shower, protect and promote the honey sweets of life's soma nourishment, and bear and bring untainted health and long life for the performer and promoter of yajna, the sun which, energised by Vayu energy of divine nature protects and sustai ns al I forms of I ife by its very essence, shines and rules life in many ways. (Rg. 10-170-1) 
475 :Lo! there rises the sun, wonderful image of Divinity, the very eye of M itra, heaven, the soothing cool of Varuna, the waters, and the beauty of the moon. It pervades and fillsthe heaven and earth and the middle regions of the sky. It is indeed the very soul of the This earth moves round and round eastward abiding in its mother waters of the firmament and revolves round and round its father sustainer, the sun in heaven. (Rg. 10-189-1) 
476 :The light of this sun radiates from morning till evening like the prana and apana of the cosmic body illuminating the mighty heaven and filling the space between heaven and earth. (Rg. 10-189-2) 
477 :Thirty stages of the day from every morning to evening does the sun rulewith the rays of its I ight whi I e songs of adoration are raised and offered to the mighty 'Bird' of heavenly space. (Rg. 10-189-3) 
478 :And, as thieves of the night steal away at dawn, so do all those stars steal away alongwith the darkness of the night so that the world may see only the sun, lord supreme of the heavens. (Rg. 1-50-2) 
479 :Light Itself, it is you alone who light the lights of the universe and reveal the worlds. You are the saviour, you are the redeemer, taking us across the seas of existence. (Rg. 1-50-4) 
480 :Lord Light of the world, to the noblest powers of nature and humanity, to the people in the business of I ife, to the peopl e i n general, you rise di rectiy and reveal your presence directly in their heart and soul so that the world may see the light divine directly through their experience. (Rg. 1-50-5) 
481 :Lord purifier and sanctifier, with the eye with which you watch the mighty world of dynamic activity and humanity holding everything in equipoise, with the same kind and benign eye watch and bless us. (Rg. 1-50-6) 
482 :The sun, bright and illuminant, yokes the seven pure, immaculate, purifying and infalliblesunbeams like horses to hi s chari ot of moti on, and w i th these self-yoked powers moves on across the spaces to the regions of light. So does the Lord of the Universe with His laws and powers of Prakrti move the world like His own chariot of creative manifestation. (Rg. 1-50-9) 
483 :universal illumination, seven are the colourful lights of glory which like seven horses draw your chariot of time across the spaces. In the same way, seven are the chhandas, metres, which reveal the light of Divinity in the sacred voice of the Veda. (Rg. 1-50-8) 
484 :Omniscient Indra, self-refulgent as the heavenly sun, with protections and promotions of the desirables, pray enlighten us for the achievement of food, energy and knowledge so that we may win the glory of life. Indra, most potent and glorious of the brave and generous, wielder of the thunderbolt of justice and retribution, give us noble strength and courage and be the guide and protector of our powers and forces of victory as far as we deserve and can achieve to the best of our potential. And this is the way, 0 lord, you feel pleased and exalted. Indra, who are omniscient, most generous of the mighty glorious, refulgent as the sun, lead us on to strength and victory. 0 lord, exalt the man who strives. 0 man, adore and exalt the lord who leads. Thus, 0 lord most potent, most adorable, wielder of the thunderbolt, destroyer of the wicked, thus do we celebrate and exalt you for gifts of wealth, honour and progress, thus do you too feel pleased. 0 lord most glorious of thunderous justice, listen, accept these adorations and be gracious to bless us. Only the mighty wins and rules. We invoke and adore the victorious, undaunted, unconquerable lord for gui dance, protecti on and progress. H e I eads us to vi ctory over our negativities, jealousies and enmities. May yajna, joint creative endeavour, knowledge, universal truth and law abound and rule the world. For the achievement of wealth, honour and excellence, we invoke and call upon Indra, conqueror, undaunted, invincible. Indra, help us overthrow the enemies. Indra inspires us to throw out our enemies, negativities and jealousies. Purvasya yat te adrivo ahsur madaya. Sumna d dhehi no vaso purtih savistha sasyate. Vast hi sakro nunam tan navyam samnyase. Eternal lord of thunder and shower of clouds, a glimpse of your divine light, just a flash, is for the soul's bliss. 0 blissful shelter of the world, pray establish us in the peace and ecstasy of the divine presence. Omnipotent lord of peace and bliss, that fulfillment is supreme. T he L ord omn i potent i s the rul er and control I er of the universe. Truly that fulfillment is most adorable, the ultimate prize to win. Eva hye  ?  ?  ?va. Evan hyagne. Eva hindra. Eva hi pusan. Eva hi devah. Om eva hi devah. So It is. So is Divinity. Such is Indra. So isAgni, the same. Such is Pusha, lifesustainer, the same. So are you all, divinities, the same, One. Sa nah pavasva sain gave sam janaya sam arvate. Sam rajann osadhibhyah. Pure, powerful and heavenly radiations of divinity flow with beauty, glory and shining sublimity of grace, blessing the mind and soul of the supplicants. (Rg. 9-64-28) 
485 :of victory rushes to the field and wins the battle, and j ust as ardent yaj akas sit on the vedi and wi n thei r obj ect of yajna, so does the soul assisted by senses, mind and intelligential vision win the target of its meditation on Om, the presence of divinity. (Rg. 9-64-29) 
486 :The honey sweet nectar of soma ecstasy created and vibrating in the presence of the supreme imperishable eternal spirit, the yogi's thoughts and words exalt in celebration. (Rg. 9-66-11) 
487 :J ust as cows retire into their stall, and words of language retire into the ocean of absolute silence, so do the mental fluctuations of the yogi recede and return into the origin of theirflow, into divinity. (Rg. 9-66-12) 
488 :ComeAgni, sung and celebrated, to join our feast of enlightenment, accept our homage to create the gifts of life and yajnic development, and take the honoured seat in the assembly. (Rg. 6-16-10) 
489 :Angira, breath of life, light of the world, expansive, lustrous pure and most youthful, we honour and exalt you with offers of fuel and ghrta to raise the flames of fire to the heights. (Rg. 6-16-11) 
490 :Agni, lord of light and lustre, mighty expansive power, you bless us graciously with admirable strength and courage worthy of universal honour and fame. (Rg. 6-16-12) 
491 :M ay M itra and Varuna, sun and shower, heat and cold, fire and water, and friends of the nation inspired with j ustice and rectitude, ferti Iise and energise our Iands and environment with waters and yajnic enrichments, protect and promote our cows and other cattle wealth, develop our milk products, and make the earth flow with streams of milk and honey. May all these powers do good to humanity, our lands and our homes. (Rg. 3-62-16) 
492 :M itra and Varuna, friends of humanity, dedicated to justice and values of rectitude, universally adored and exalted with homage, dedicated to observance of truth and purity of life and conduct, you shine and reign by the strength of your will and vision, dexterity of your art and expertise and the acts of persistent patience and endurance. (Rg. 3-62-17) 
493 :M itra and Varuna, friends of humanity dedicated to love and justice, exalted by life and acts of truth, exalting universal law and the flow of existence, celebrated by men of vision dedicated to rational and empirical experience of reality, abide in the house of truth and righteousness on the vedi of yajna, protect, promote and enjoy the beauty, peace and ecstasy of life. (Rg. 3-62-18) J A yahi susuma hi ta indra somam piba imam. Edam barhih sado mama. Indra, lord omnipotent and omnipresent, we hold the yajna and distil the soma of life in your service. Come, grace this holy seat of my yajna dedicated to you, watch my performance, enjoy the soma, and protect and promote the yajna for the beauty and joy of life. Let the radiant waves of cosmic energy engaged in the service of divinity bring you here. Pray listen to our songs of prayer and adoration. (Rg. 8-17-2) 
494 :Dedicated to divinity and the divine voice, meditating on the divine presence with concentrated mind and soul, living in truth the beauty of life and expressing the ecstasy of soma, we invoke and wait for Indra, original maker and lover of soma, to come and bless us. (Rg. 8-17-3) 
495 :Indra and Agni, lord of might and lord of light, brilliant and blazing like thunder and lightning, come to this child worthy of love and choice, come with voices from the heavens and inspire the darling with intelligence and passion for action. (Rg. 3-12-1) 
496 :Indra, lord of wealth and power, A gni, lord of light and knowledge, friends of thesupplicantcelebrant, the child is yajna, worthy of love, dedication and consecration, sensitive and intelligent, and moves forward to learn. N urture him with the holy voice and the Word. (Rg. 3-12-2) 
497 :I choose Indra and Agni, both patrons and promoters of poets, with holy enthusiasm such as the fire of yajna. M ay they both come here, have a drink of soma, and bless the child. (Rg. 3-12-3) 
498 :Soma, lord of peace and purity, power and piety, creator, controller and commander of the entire wealth of life, flow on by the dynamics of nature and bless us for the benefit of power and glory, yajna and unity among the yajakas, judgement and right values and the vibrant forces of law and order. (Rg. 9-61-12) 
499 :Soma is the lord of humanity and the earth. By virtue of him and of him, we ask and pray for all food, energy, honour and excellence for humanity, serving him and sharing all the benefits together. (Rg.9-61-11) 
500 :Giver of fulfilment, treasure trove of life's sustaining milk, yielding celestial dear honey sweets of living strength and joy, pervasive in its eternal universal loved seat, all conqueror all watching and knowing, when moved by meditative celebrants, Soma radiates and vibrates i n the faithful heart of earnest seekers. (R g. 9-107-5) 
501 :Pra tu drava pari kosarii ni sida nrbhihpuna.no abhi vajam arsa. Asvam na tva vajinarn marjayanto ccha barhi rasanabhir nay anti. arms, destroyer of scandal and malignity, protector of yajna vedi against crookedness and intrigue, flows pure and purifying. It is the generator and sustainer of the divine powers of nature and humanity, perfect and expert original agent of action, pillar of heaven and foundation support of the earth. (Rg. 9-87-2) 
502 :Rsir viprah pura eta jananam rbhur dhira usana kavyena. Sa cid viveda nihitam yad asam aplcyam guhyam nama gonam. Divine seer, vibrant and sagely power, potent maker, stable of will and action, Soma is brilliant with innate vision and wisdom. He alone knows what is the hidden secret and mystery of these stars and planets. (Rg. 9-87-3) 
503 :Na tvavah anyo divyo na parthivo na jato na janisyate. Asvayanto maghavannindra vajino gavyantas tva havamahe. There is none other like you, neither heavenly nor earthly, neither born nor yet to be born. 0 lord of power and glory, we invoke you and pray for veteran scholars, dynamic scientists and technologists and the light of the divine Word of knowledge. (Rg. 7-32-23) 
504 :When would the Lord, sublime and wondrous, ever greater, ever friendly, shine in our consciousness and bless us? With what gifts of protection and promotion? What highest favour of our choice? What order of grace? (Rg. 4-31-1) 
505 :W hat is the truest and highest of joys and foods for body, mind and soul that may please you? What wealth and value of life to help you break through the limitations and settle on the rock-bed foundation of permanence? (Rg. 4-31-2) 
506 :Friend of friends and protector of celebrants you are, come and bless us too with a hundred modes of protection and advancement. Be ours, 0 lord ! (Rg.4-31-3) 
507 :We invoke and call upon Indra eagerly as cows call for their calves in the stalls, and with songs of adoration over night and day we glorify him, lord glorious, omnipotent power fighting for truth against evil forces, and exhilarated with the bright soma of worship offered by celebrant humanity. (Rg. 8-88-1) 
508 :We pray to Indra, lord of light, omnificent, hallowed with heavenly glory, universally generous like clouds of shower, and we ask for food abounding in strength and nourishment and for hundredfold and thousandfold wealth and prosperity abounding in lands, cows and the graces of literature and culture, and we pray for the gift instantly. (Rg. 8-88-2) 
509 :In the yajna of love and non-violence where everything is perfect and soma is distilled, I invoke Indra like Abundance itself, giver of wealth, honour and fulfilment. Singing songs of adoration with energy and enthusi asm for your protecti on and progress, 0 devotees, celebrate Indra who brings wealth, honour and excellence at the earliest by fastest means. (Rg.8-66-1) 
510 :Indra whom none can stop in his state of ecstasy and abundant charity, neither the impetuous, nor the constant, nor demon nor mortal, Indra who is the giver of cherished wealth and joy to the celebrant, the creator of soma and thezealous worshipper with deep reverence and homage. (Rg. 8-66-2) 
511 :(Soma in the physical sense is an exhilarating drink, in the aesthetic sense it is ecstasy, in the psychic sense it is ananda, and in the spiritual sense it is elevation of the soul to the experience of divinity. It is the peace, purity and glory of life, any power physical, social or divine that leads to satyam (truth), shivam (goodness), and sundaram (beauty) of life, anything, power and person that gives us an experience of sacchidananda, the real, the intelligent and the blissful state of the life divine. In short, Soma is satyam, shivam and sundaram, the sat, the chit and the ananda of life. It is not restricted to a particular herb and a particular drink. The meaning of soma is open-ended on the positive side of life and living joy.) 
512 :You are the destroyer of negativity, destructivity and evil and darkness, you are universal watcher and guardian of all that is, you are centre of the origin and end of existence, veiled in impenetrable womb of gold, you are ever on the move yet settled and constant in the house of life. (Soma is Divinity Itself.) (Rg. 9-1-2) 
513 :life, mightiest munificent, and the destroyer of want, suffering and darkness. Sanctify the wealth of the prosperous and powerful with showers of peace, purity and generosity. (Rg. 9-1-3) 
514 :Having drunk of the Soma spirit of light, action and joy, Indra, the soul, overflows with strength and virile generosity. Having drunk of it, the soul receives the light of heavenly knowledge. And the soul, also, blest with inner light of spiritual awareness, rushes to achieve food, energy and enlightenment as a warrior wins the battle of his challenges. (Rg. 9-108-2) 
515 :May these realised, cleansed and confirmed, blessed, beautiful and brilliant virtues and sanskars touching the bounds of divine bliss, emerging and risen in the mind, well reach and seep into the heart core of the soul completely and permanently. (Rg. 9-106-1) 
516 :This Soma, competent and victorious for the battle of life, when realised, flows for I ndra, the winning soul, and enlightens it about the world's reality as it is and as it knows. (Rg. 9-106-2) 
517 :divine love, let the soul seize the victorious bow, take on the generous virileand mighty boltof will and power of faith and win the target of the battle of Karma to the attainment of Divinity. (Rg. 9-106-3) 
518 :Brilliant and blissful Soma, when, filtered and exhilarated, vibrates and flows in clear purifying streams like waves of energy itself. (Rg. 9-101-2) 
519 :That blazing unassailable Soma, adorable in yajna, leading lights of rock-bed foundation invoke and impel with universal thought and speech, with controlled mental reflection for self-realisation. (Rg. 9-101-3) 
520 :Soma, spirit of life and joy of existence, mighty, infinite, omnipresent, pervades and vitalises all dear beautiful systems of waters and light, expansive and exalted therein. Greater than the great, all watching, it rides the grand chariot of the sun which comprehends and illuminates the whole world. (Rg. 9-75-1) 
521 :The flame of yajna as the voice of eternal truth rises and expresses the dear delicious beauty and glory of Soma, spirit of universal light and bliss. The speaker and protector of the acts of yajna and Soma truth of life is fearless, undaunted. J ust as progeny isthecontinuance and i 11 umi nati on of the honour and reverence of parents, so is yajna the progeny and illuminative soma of Soma refulgent in the third and highest region of the light of existence. (Rg. 9-75-2) 
522 :Evoked and concentrated in the golden cave of the heart by veteran yogis, leading them to a vision of divinity, illuminating the sacred hearts, it vibrates and speaks loud and bold in the spirit. Those who distil the eternal truth of existence in their yajnic communion with divinity celebrate and exalt it in song as it abides over three regions of earth, heaven and the skies and shines over the glory of dawns. (Rg. 9-75-3) 
523 :In every yajnic programme of your creative and constructive work, in every word of our voice, join and let us honour, appraise and develop agni, imperishable energy pervasive in all things of existence and adore Agni, omniscient and omnipresent lord giver of knowledge and enlightenment. (Rg. 6-48-1) 
524 :Urjo napatam sa hi nay am asmayur dasema havyadataye. Bhuvad vajesvavita bhuvad vrdha uta trata tanunam. Let us honour and serveAgni, infallible cosmic light and energy, power that is surely our own, lover and benefactor in matters of creation and development. M ay Agni be our protector and promoter in our struggles for progress and may he be the saviour and cleanser of our health of body, mind and social order. (Rg. 6-48-2) 
525 :Agni, leading light and pioneer, come, listen, thus do I speak in honour of you, and listen further to higher words, and rise higher with these words sweet and soothing like rays of the moon and exciting as draughts of soma. (Rg. 6-16-16) 
526 :Never is the perfection, abundance and fruitfulness of your food and sustenance ever wasted away, instead it increases, 0 haven and home of life and creator of its sustenance. H ence accept our homage and reverence. (Rg. 6-16-18) 
527 :of life for food, energy, knowledgeand ultimate victory. (Rg. 8-21-1) 
528 :Upa tva karmann utaye sa no yuvograscakrdma yo dhrsat. Tvam idhyavitaram vavrmahe sakhaya indra sanasim. We approach you for protection and success in every undertaking. 0 lord youthful and blazing brave who can challenge and subdue any difficulty, pray come to our help. Indra, friends and admirers of yours, we depend on you alone as our sole saviour and victorious lord and choose to pray to you only as the lord supreme. (Rg. 8-21-2) 
529 :And 0 lord lover of song and celebration, Indra, we send up vaulting voices of ambition, adoration and prayer to you like wave on waves of the flood rolling upon the sea. (Rg. 8-98-7) 
530 :Two motive forces like chariot horses, controlled by word, carry Indra, the soul, in the wide yoked spacious body-chariot by the power of the adorations of the universal blissful mover, Indra, cosmic energy. (Rg. 8-98-9) 
531 :Sing in praise and appreciation of I ndra, the ruler, protector of your food, sustenance and maintenance, all tolerant, all defender and all challenger, hero of a hundred noble actions and the best, most generous and most brilliant of the people. (Rg. 8-92-1) 
532 :Call him by the name and title of'Indra 1 , invoked by many, adored by all, worthy of celebration in story, all time famous who is also a scholar of universal knowledge. (Rg. 8-92-2) 
533 :I ndra is a happy and joyous leader, giver of a high order of living, energy and life's victories. M ay he, with love, courtesy and humility, lead us to life's greatness and glory. (Rg. 8-92-3) 
534 :Say adorable words of praise for Indra, generous giver, and sing heavenly songs for him as leading lights of the nation do. Let us too do the same honour to him, the great accomplisher of truth. (Rg. 7-31-2) 
535 :Indra, glorious ruler, you are giver of peace and settlement, you are accomplisher of a hundred yajnic acts of truth, you are giver of victory and progress to us, you are lover of the land and culture and you are creator of golden wealth, honour and excellence. (Rg. 7-31-3) 
536 :Indra, we too have the same aims and objectives asyou. Weareyourfriendsand admirers. Weknow and wish to achieve, and with all words of praise and appreciation, we adore you as others, wise devotees, do. (Rg.8-2-16) 
537 :Indra, lord of thunder and justice, inthe beginning of a new plan, action or programme of holiness, I adore none else but only you. I know only one song of adoration and that is for you alone. (Rg. 8-2-17) 
538 :Divines of brilliance and holy action love those engaged in creative actions of piety. They care not for dreams and love no dreamers. Active, wakeful and realistic beyond illusion, they achieve the joy of success in life. (Rg. 8-2-18) 
539 :Let all ourvoicesof admiration flow and intensify the soma for the joy of Indra, and let the poets sing songs of adoration for him and celebrate his achievements. (Rg. 8-92-19) 
540 :In our soma yajna of life, in meditation, and in the holy business of living, we invoke Indra, in whom all beauties and graces abide, whom all the seven seers in yajna adore, in whom all five senses, mind and intelligence subside absorbed, and under whom all the seven assemblies of the world unite, meet and act. (Rg. 8-92-20) 
541 :In three modes of body, mind and soul, the devas, seven senses, the human consciousness and the noble yogis, concentrate on Indra, divine consciousness. In three regions of the universe, noble souls meditate on the universal consciousness of the divine Indra. Thus they perform the yajna of divinity in communion. M ay all our songs of adoration glorify that supreme consciousness, Indra. (Rg. 8-92-21) 
542 :Indra, this soma pure and sanctified on the holy grass of yajna vedi, is dedicated to you. Come fast, you would love it, drink and enjoy, and protect and promote it for the good of all. (Rg. 8-17-11) 
543 :Lord self-refulgent creator of stars and planets, glorious adorable, this cosmic soma of the universe of your creation is for the joy of life. Therefore, 0 lord imperishable, you are invoked and adored with love and faith. (Rg. 8-17-12) 
544 :A tu na indra ksumantam citram grabham sam grbhaya. Mahdhasti daksinena. right hand abundant riches for us which may be full of nourishment, energy, wonderful beauty and grace worth having as a prize possession. (Rg. 8-81-1) 
545 :We know you as lord of universal action, all giving, treasure hold of unbounded wealth and boundless in power and presence with your favour and protections. (Rg. 8-81-2) 
546 :Na hi tva sura deva na martaso ditsantam. Bhimam na gam varayante. When you give to bless mankind, no one can stop you, 0 brave lord, neither mortals nor immortals, just as no one can resist the mighty sun. (Rg. 8-81-3) 
547 :yajna is on and soma is distilled, I prepare the cup and offer you the drink. Pray accept, drink to your heart's content and enjoy the ecstasy of bliss divine. (Rg. 8- 45-22) 
548 :Let the fools and scoffers never get round you, even if they profess that they are keen to please you, for protection and support. Never support the negationists of knowledge, piety, existence and divinity. (Rg. 8-45-23) 
549 :Here may devotees entertain you Indra, lover of light, with milk and soma for the achievement of great competence and success so that you may drink I ike the thirsty stag drinking at the pool. (Rg. 8-45-24) 
550 :Stirred by best of men, crushed and filtered by men of adamantine character, purified and guarded by best of the brave, it is sparkling like sun rays reflected on the river waters. (Rg. 8-2-2) 
551 :That sparkling soma drink of devotion seasoned with barley, mixed with milk and cream, we, blenders, having prepared it, offer to you in this house of celebration. (Rg. 8-2-3) 
552 :Indra, lord ruler of the world, whatever and whoever be in accord with your power and pleasure, pray control, direct, administer and order the body- politic into settled form, and may all that give you pleasure and satisfaction, lover and creator of soma peace as you are. (Rg. 3-51-11) 
553 :Indra, heroic lord ruler of the world, whatever you receive into the body of your treasury for asset and energy, may that wealth and energy inspire your mind with knowledge and enlightenment, and strengthen your arms for potential development of the wealth of nations. (Rg. 3-51-12) 
554 :Friends and celebrants of song divine, come, sit together and join to meditate (on life, divinity, humanity, science and spirituality, and freedom), and sing in thankful praise of Indra, lord of life and energy. (Rg. 1-5-1) 
555 :Friends and comrades in study and meditation, when you have distilled the essence of soma, life and spirit present at the heart of things, then sing in praise of Indra, closest at hand of things in heaven and earth, and ruler dispenser of the fruits of love and desire. (Rg. 1-5-2) 
556 :Indra, life and energy of the universe, is at the heart of our meditation. That is the spirit and secret of the wealth of the world. That is the inspiration at the centre of our thought and intelligence. May that lord of life and energy come and bless us with gifts of knowledge and power in our joint endevours. (Rg. 1-5-3) 
557 :Friends together and friends of Indra ever stronger and mightier, in every act of production and progress and in every battle for protection and preservation, we call upon Indra for defence and victory for well-being. (Rg. 1-30-7) 
558 :I invoke and call upon the Primeval M an, eternal father, who creates this multitudinous existence from the eternal womb of nature, the same whom our original forefathers invoked and worshipped. (Rg. 1-30-9) 
559 :If Indra hears our call, let Him come, we pray, with a thousand ways of protection and progress of prosperity and well-being. (Rg. 1-30-8) 
560 :When a special yajnic programme for the realisation of special knowledge, power and expertise in a particular field is completed with hymns of thanks and praise to divinity, then Indra, lord omnipotent and omniscient, sanctifies the joint endeavour of holiness and blesses the programme with success. Great is he. (Rg. 8-13-1) 
561 :At the first expansive manifestation of space, at the centre of ail divine mutations of nature, he is the efficient cause of nature's evolution, supreme pilot, most abundant and most glorious, omnipotent victor over conflicts and negativities in the way of evolution of nature and humanity in relation to will and action. (Rg. 8-13-2) 
562 :That Indra, potent and abundant, I invoke for victory in the race for life, for growth and fulfilment. 0 lord, be our friend, our innermost centre of conscience for our progress, peace and all round well being. (Rg. 8-13-3) 
563 :and fire of life, product as welI as the source of unfaiIing energy, strength and power, cherished and valuable friend, most enlightened and constant agent of the holiest programmes of love and non-violent development, and imperishable carrier and messenger of world communications. (Rg. 7-16-1) 
564 :That Agni, leading power of nature and humanity, uses bright natural elements of universal value such as sun rays, fi re and water, I i ke horses harnessed to the chariot, and, when invoked and raised, would move at the fastest speed. H e is the master of natural knowledge and natural materials, adorable, noble and potent worker, and the accomplisher of means, materials and projects of humanity for common success and progress. (Rg. 7-16-2) 
565 :Thegreatand glorious dawn, child of thelight of divinity, is seen rising, dispelling mists and darkness, and illuminates with light the world of our actions, And then the sun, friend and associate together, takes over and, blazing with splendour, sends forth radiations of light and illuminates the planet earth. 0 dawn, in your original revelation of light divine and in the solar radiations, we pray, let us abide and act with faith and delightful experienceof the illumination. (Rg. 7-81-2) 
566 :Brilliant A shvi ns, these yajakas dedicated to life divine invoke and call upon you for light, and I too, 0 versatile commanders of the wealth of knowledge, power and vision, invite you and pray for protection and advancement since you visit and bless every individual and every community. (Rg. 7-74-1) 
567 :M en of vision and science of yajna, in pursuit of the ancient and eternal Vedic tradition of this lord of light, peace and purity, distil the brilliant, pure and powerful and visionary knowledge of a thousandfold nourishing and inspiring gifts of existence^Rg.9-54-1) 
568 :This Soma, like the sun, all watching and illuminating, sets rivers, seas and energies aflow, pervading therein on earth and in the seven-fold light of the sun upto the regions of light. (Rg. 9-54-2) 
569 :This Soma, lord of light, peace and power, pure and purifying, pervades all regions of the universe in and above, like the divine light which illuminates all regions of the universe. (Rg. 9-54-3 This divine spirit since its timeless manifestation, revealed and manifested for the divines, arises in the pure hearts of humanity, eliminating pain and suffering. (Rg. 9-3-9) 
570 :This divine Soma, light and vision of the world, self-realised by the sages and glorified with ancient and eternal hymns of the Veda, vibratesfor them in the heart and soul and sanctifies them with showers of heavenly bliss. (Rg. 9-42-2) 
571 :Creating the eternal life-giving food of divine ecstasy for the soul, the presence of blissful Soma vibrates in the heart of the celebrant and, calling out as if loud and bold, awakens the dormant divine potentialities of the devotee to active possibilities. (Rg. 9-42-4) 
572 :Soma, spirit of beauty, grace and glory, divinely created, nobly born, zealous, destroyer of negativity, beatified and celebrated in songs of divine voice, the noblest powers of nature and humanity adore, share and enjoy. (Rg.9-61-13) 
573 :men strive for things of beauty and goodness, so do inspired learned sages, lovers of dynamic peace and goodness, move forward to realise the supreme power and Spirit of the Vedic hymns. (Rg. 9-33-1) 
574 :J ust as pure, powerful, brown nectar streams of soma shower milky energies to fill the casks of exhilarating drink for the aspirants, so do seasoned self- realised scholars and teachers of Vedic knowledge and experience, pure at heart and clairvoyant in vision and intelligence, let flow powerful exhilarating streams of knowledge and enlightenment in channels of truth, law and immortality for competent and conscientious seekers of life's fulfilment. (Rg. 9-33-2) 
575 :Knowledge, wisdom and expertise, valuable and blissful as soma, collected and refined by sages and scholars of vision and experience, flows on for Indra, the ruling soul, Vayu, the vibrant people, Varuna, powers of judgement and dispensation, M aruts, stormy warriors, and Vishnu, universal sustaining powers of life and humanity. (Rg. 9-33-3) 
576 :Dear, loved and fascinating, Soma emerges in transparent unsullied form, winsome worth refinement like a child's and inspiring as a sanative. Devotees stimulate it with holy karma, a thing beautiful and inspiring, and let it join and flow in the streams of thought and action between their intellect and emotion and their prana and apana energies. (Rg. 9-107-13) 
577 :May the streams of soma, nectar sweet and exhilarating, distilled and sanctified in yajna, flow for the safety, security and fame of our leading lights of honour, power and excellence. (Rg. 9-32-1) 
578 :And just as a hansa bird joins its flock and just as a horse is controlled by reins to reach the destination, so does the soul, having controlled and concentrated all senses, mind and intelligence, rise and join the presence of Divinity, its ultimate haven and home. (Rg. 9-32-3) 
579 :And the vibrant thoughts and words of the sage beyond threefold bondage of body, mind and soul, with all perceptions of sense and conceptions of mind concentrated, rise, reach and exalt the lord of peace and joy, destroyer of suffering, for the enlightenment and ecstasy of the human soul. (Rg. 9-32-2) 
580 :Thus vibrate, purify and flow, friend of sages and divines, releasing these honey streams of joy, and go on eloquent to bless the pure heart all round all ways in the world. (Rg. 9-106-14) 
581 :The beauteous and beatific divine saviour spirit of Soma vibrates, purifies and flows with tremendous force, casting off all crookedness and contradictions, and overflowing with valour, honour and excellence for the celebrants and their heroic progeny for generations. (Rg. 9-106-13) 
582 :That silent voice of the generative illuminative Soma of divine food, energy and enlightenment for the devotee, the ordinary mortal does not perceive. 0 yajakas, ward off the cl amours and noiseswhich disturb the meditative yajna as men of wisdom ward them off to save their yajna. (Rg. 9-101-13) 
583 :Soma, lord of purity and generosity, light and splendour, served and realised through yajnic life, protect and purify us, help us join the community of honour and excellence, ward off and eliminate all malignity, jealousy and enmity from our life. (Rg. 9-61-28) 
584 :Whatever are your sharpest and most awful weapons for the destruction of destroyers, with those weapons, pray, protect us against all maligners and enemies. (Rg. 9-61-30) 
585 :Generous as you are, your strength rains in showers, generous is your plenitude, generous is the bliss of your joy and ecstasy. Eternal truth, shower of generosity, truly you are the ultimate generous giver of the joy of life. (Rg. 9-64-2) 
586 :Like the roar of thunder you are loud and bold in manifestation in existence. 0 dynamic presence of infinite light and generous flow of energy, you pervade and energise our perceptions and our will for action and advancement. Pray open and widen the doors of wealth, honour and excellence for us all. (Rg. 9-64-3) 
587 :The streams of your piety, purity, peace and plenty rain in showers for the pure heart and soul in humanity. 0 Soma, with those showers, pray bless us with happiness, prosperity and all round well being. (Rg. 9-61-5) 
588 :We choose A gni, the f i re, as pri me power of soci al yajna, which carries the fragrance of yajna universally across the earth, the sky and even to the heavens, and which is the chief creator of prosperity and maker of beautiful forms. (Rg. 1-12-1) 
589 :WechooseAgni visibleand invisible, and invoke itwith faith and holy action, Agni which is the protector of the people, carrier of yajnic fragrance, and favourite of the wise. (Rg. 1-12-2) 
590 :Agni, omniscient and omnipresent power, bring us here the brilliant divine gifts of yajna for the pure at heart. You alone are the chief priest and performer of the yajna of creation. You alone are adorable. (Rg. 1-12-3) 
591 :For the creation, preservation and promotion of soma, peace and joy of life, we invoke M itraand Varuna, life energies of prana and udana in systemic circulation, which are purifying, vitalising and enlightening for the body, mind and soul. (Rg. 1-23-4) 
592 :For our enlightenment and spiritual advancement, weinvokeM itraand Varuna, light of thesun and motive energy of the wind, both guardians of the light of truth and natural laws of Divinity, which, by that very light of truth, extend the operation of that law in the Lord's creation upto the mind and soul of humanity. (Rg. 1-23-5) 
593 :Varuna is breath of air, and M itra, light of the sun, with energies and all the vitalities and immunities of human life and prosperity. May they both help us rise to the noblest wealth of body, mind and soul (Rg. 1-23-6) 
594 :Indram id gdthino brhad indram arkebhir arkinah. Indram vanir anus at a. The singers of Vedic hymns worship Indra, infinite lord of the expansive universe, Indra, the sun, lord of light, Indra, vayu, maruts, currents of energy, and Indra, the universal divine voice, with prayers, mantras, actions and scientific research. (Rg. 1-7-1) 
595 :I ndra, the omnipresent Spirit, I ndra, the universal energy of vayu or maruts, and Indra, the solar energy, the bond of unity and sustenance in things, co-existent synthesis of equal and opposite complementarities of positive and negative, activiser of speech, lord of the thunderbolt and the golden light of the day and the year. (Rg. 1-7-2) 
596 :I ndra, lord of lightand omnipotence, in athousand battles of life and prize contests, protect us with bright blazing ways of protection and advancement. (Rg.1-7-4) 
597 :Indra, lord omnipotent, raised the sun high up in the heavens for expansive light and vision. With the rays of the sun, He forms and moves the cloud for rain. (Rg. 1-7-3) 
598 :Salutations and high honour to Indra and Agni, leading lights of action and advancement with enlightenment. Let us offer them high praise and gratitude in the best of words with the best of thoughts. We need protection, and they are protectors and guides in our course of progress. (Rg. 7-94-4) 
599 :Beset with difficulties, saints and sages, scholars and pioneers always look up to them and thus pray for protection and guidance to move further and win their goal. (Rg. 7-94-5) 
600 :With songs of praise, bearing homage and havi for the holy fire, we invoke and invite you to our yajna in search of higher initiative and further self advancement. (Rg. 7-94-6) 
601 :That lord sustainer of earth and heaven, pure and purifying sanctifier, watchful guardian and giver of bliss, absolute victor in the evolutionary battles of existence, we invoke, exalt and glorify for our good and advancement. (Rg. 9-65-11) 
602 :Invoked and moved by this earnest and vibrant adoration, pray bless us with this shower of purity, peace and bliss. You are the destroyer of want and suffering. Pray inspire, strengthen and fortify the friend, your instrument, in the battles of life. (Rg. 9-65-12) 
603 :Generous, joyous and refulgent Soma spirit divine pervades the stars and planets and vibrates in the sun rays, making the heaven and earth resound. It is the very voice of Indra, lord omnipotent, heard in the dynamics of existence, awakening the spirit, and it inspires this holy speech to burstforth in adoration. (Rg. 9-97-13) 
604 :Thus vibrate and flow on, spirit of ecstasy, for joy, bending and breaking the clouds which hold up the rain and radiations of light, and, bearing bright light and illuminative varieties of knowledge, continue to flow on, 0 Soma, generous and exalted presence, lover of showers and light and bearer of the bolt of power and force to strike down the negativities. (Rg. 9-97-15) 
605 :I ndra, lord of power and advancement, you alone we invoke and call upon for acquisition of food, energy, honour, excellence and progress. All of us, leading people, makers, poets, artists, artisans and architects of the nation, fast advancing in all directions, invoke and exhort you, protector and promoter of universal truth and values in human struggles for light, goodness and generosity, and the wealth of life. (Rg. 6-46-1) 
606 :Indra, lord of wondrous powers and performance, wielding the thunderbolt of justice and punishment in hand, great and glorious, breaker of the clouds and shaker of mountains, invoked and adored in song, with truth and science, power and force, collect, organise and win for us the wealth of lands, cows and rays of the sun, horses, transports and chariots like the victories of wealth and glory for the ambitious nation. (Rg. 6-46-2) 
607 :To the best of your intention and purpose and for whatever you wish to achieve, pray to Indra, lord of glory, world power and promotion and means of success, who gives a thousandfold wealth, honour and excellence to his celebrants. (Rg. 8-49-1) 
608 :Like the commander of a hundred armies, with his power and force, Indra rushes forward to fight and win, and he destroys the demons of darkness and want for the charitable giver. The gifts of this universal giver of food and sustenance feed and support humanity like streams flowing down from the mountains. (Rg. 8-49-2) 
609 :Indra, lord of mind and soul, wielder of adamantine will and energy, zealous celebrants and leading lights serve and adore you today as ever before in the past. Thus adored and contemplated, listen to the prayers of the devotees in meditation, come and arise in your own abode of the sage's heart. (Rg. 8-99-1) 
610 :heart. You alone, the wise sages exalt and glorify. Indra, lord adorable in song, when the yajnic communion of meditation is fulfilled, the vibrations of your ecstatic presence are ideal and admirable. (Rg. 8-99-2) 
611 :The soma ecstasy that's yours, that is the highest love of our choice. Flow on, radiate, and sanctify us beyond satiation with lightdivineforthesoul, protector and saviour as you are of the holy and destroyer of sin and evil for the good. (Rg. 9-61-19) 
612 :Soma, power and peace of divinity, destroyer of the evil and darkness of negative forces, constant catalytic force of nature in creative evolution day in and day out, you are the giver of earthly life and dynamic motion for onward progress. (Rg. 9-61-20) 
613 :Be bright and blazing, integrated with creative powers of growth, perception and imagination, soj ourni ng over space and ti me yet resti ng i n your seat at the centre of existence. (Rg. 9-61-21) 
614 :It is Pusha, life-sustaining and nourishing protector, wealth and honour of the world, power and the glory, Soma that is pure and purifying, ever going forward with the world. It is the master, sustainer and ruler of the vast expansive universe and i 11 umi nates both heaven and earth. (Rg. 9-101-7) 
615 :Dear daring voices exalt and extol Soma for the sheer joy of illumination. Indeed men of Soma vision and courage, blazing brilliant, pure, purifying and pursuing, create and carve their own paths of progress. (Rg. 9-101-8) 
616 :Generous inspirer of the intelligent and meditative souls, Soma pervades, flows and purifies. Omniscient and all watching, it is the illuminator of the day, the dawn and the sun. Life energy of floods, rivers, oceans and the seas, it vibrates in alI forms of existence. It loves the sacred heart and with love it enters and blesses the heart core of the pious and powerful soul of humanity. Such is Soma celebrated by the sages and wise scholars. (Rg. 9-86-19) 
617 :Eternal, all-watchful, poetic creator celebrated by sages and meditated by pious people pervades, energises and holds to the centre all forms of existence from the cell and particle upto the expansive universe, creating from Prakrti and its three modes of sattva, rajas and tamas all forms and names of things, letting streams of honey sweets flow, and releasing the joint, cooperative and friendly activity of Indra and Vayu energy and its flow at the cosmic level, and the soul and mind at the human level. (Rg. 9-86-20) 
618 :This Soma, illuminating the dawns, became the maker of the worlds from the oceanic flood of particles of Prakrti, the one material cause of the universe. C reati ng the mil k of nouri shment and sustenance of I if e from thrice seven orders of Prakrti, M other Nature, its ow n shakti, that i s, three modes of sattva, raj as and tamas (mind, motion and matter), two generalities of Mahat and Ahankara (tangible nature from the intangible, and identity from thetangible) andfivespecificities of basic elements (A kasha, Vayu, A gni, A pah and Prthivi), it flows pure, purifying, beatific and ecstatic in the heart core of the soul. (Rg. 9-86-21) 
619 :You love and honour the brave, you are brave yourself, you are definite in intention and undisturbed i n attitudes. Y ou are now ri pe for the perfecti on of mi nd to experience the soul's beatitude in, divine presence. (Rg. 8-92-28) 
620 :Indra, generous lord of the wealth and glory of the world, thus by practice and meditation, is divine generosity cultivated and achieved by all those who bear and bring the offerings to you. 0 lord of power and immense generosity, beourfriend and companion. (Rg. 8-92-29) 
621 :May all the songs of divine love and worship celebrate and glorify Indra, lord infinite and glorious like the expansive oceans of space, highest redeemer, higher than all other saviours, sole true lord victorious of the battles of life between good and evil, ultimate protector and promoter of humanity and ruler of existence. (Rg. 1-11-1) 
622 :We are the friends of Indra, we are the fighters of life and humanity. Indra, lord of might, never shall we succumb to fear while we are under the cover of your protective friendship. We offer homage and worship to you, supreme victor, unbeaten since eternity. (Rg. 1- 11-2) 
623 :The eternal gifts of I ndra, lord magnificent, never fail, Hisfavoursand protections never fade, nor exhaust, because the munificence of the lord of earth and His bounties of wealth and honouralwaysflow in abundance more and ever more for the devotees. (Rg. 1-11-3) 
624 :These vibrant forces of humanity dedicated to peace and joy for all, above pettiness and negativities, move on with noble work for humanity toward the achievement of all wealth, honour and excellence. (Rg. 9-62-1) 
625 :Overcoming and eliminating the many evils and undesirables of life, creating peace and comfort, wealth and honour for vibrant humanity and their progress through future generations, they go on as warriors and pioneers of the human nation. (Rg. 9-62-2) 
626 :Creating, collecting and preserving noble wealth and strength and sustenance for us and for our lands and cows and the honour and culture of our tradition, they go on winning appreciation and admiration. (Rg. 9-62-3) 
627 :RefulgentSoma, divinespiritof power and peace, pure, purifying and vibrant, is attained through intelligential communion in meditation for reaching the higher stages of existence into the middle sphere between the earth and the highest regions of bliss. (Rg. 9-65-16) 
628 :Soma, lord of vital creativity and lustrous vigour, and fluent power and progressive energy, bring us the courage of constancy, forbearance, vibrant vigour and enthusiasm, and an impressive personality for the sake of illuminative lustre of life so that we may follow the I ndu, lord of joy, beauty and prosperity, bring us a hundredfold wealth and pi easure of divine service and dedication, rising prosperity of cows and horses, enlightenment and advancement, progress and achievement, all for peace and security. (Rg. 9-65-17) 
629 :We worship you, eliminator of arrogance and pride, adorable, observer of lofty vows of discipline, inspiring, and breaker of a hundred strongholds of darkness. (Rg. 9-48-2) 
630 :For this reason of your glory and inspiring nature, 0 lord of holy action and self-refulgent ruler, controller and dispenser of wealth, honour and excellence, the veteran sage and scholar can i nvoke you from the heights of heaven without fear and difficulty. (Rg. 9-48-3) 
631 :And so, the inspirer of the power of senses, mind and intelligence, giver of fulfilment to the devotees, all watching Soma, divine Spirit of peace, power and enlightenment, pervades and abides in and over existence as the supreme power of divine glory. (Rg. 9-48-5) 
632 :The sage and scholar of lofty vision and imagination, in order that all visionaries of the world may perceive your heavenly majesty, communicates his experience of your presence who are present everywhere, who give motion to the energy of nature in the cosmic dynamics and who rule and protect the laws of eternal truth which govern the course of existence. (Rg.9-48-4) 
633 :Shower in streams of purity and power and bless us with food, energy and fulfilment, adored and exalted as you are by sages, scholars and thoughtful devotees. 0 lord of bliss and beauty, come and, with the light and joy of your presence, sanctify our senses and mind, vision and intelligence. (Rg. 9-64-13) 
634 :Pure and purifying, adorable, adored and exalted, saviour from sin and evil, want and suffering, create the best of wealth, energy and ecstasy for humanity, giving all round joy and well being for body, mind and soul. (Rg. 9-64-14) 
635 :Purified, bright and clear Soma, songs of adoration for service of divinity, go upto the presence of Indra, lord omnipotent. Shining powerful, sent up, inspired by enthusiastic celebrants, rise up to divinity.(Rg. 9-64-15) 
636 :Agni is lighted, generated and raised by agni, universal energy. It is the creator of new things, protector and promoter of the home, and ever young-powerful catalytic agent carrying holy materials to the sky and to the heavens across space, and a voracious consumer (and creator) with its mouth ever open to devour (and convert) holy offerings (to divine gifts of joy and prosperity). (Rg. 1-12-6) 
637 :Lord omniscient and resplendent, protector and harbinger of the holy gifts and blessings of life, whosoever be the yaj napati of servi ce w i th holy off eri ng unto you, save, protect and promote. (Rg. 1-12-8) 
638 :Whosoever offers yajna with holy materials in honour and service to Agni for the gifts of the divine, to him, brilliant power, be kind and gracious with blessings. (Rg. 1-12-9) 
639 :I invoke, with dedication, Mitra the sun, pure, generous and sanctifying, and Varuna, pranic energy of nature, nourishing and immunizing, both divine agents of cosmic intelligence and natural powers of human evolution (in science and art). (Rg. 1-2-7) 
640 :By virtue of the divine law, M itra and Varuna, sun and pranic energy, both extend the operation of the natural law of cosmic evolution and inspire the human intelligence to reach unto divine realisation. They both pervade and energize the mighty yajna of the expanding universe. (Rg. 1-2-8) 
641 :Creative, illuminative and inspiring, Mitra and Varuna, sun and pranic energy, like the breath of life, are universally pervasive and mighty potent, and both wield the divine power of versatile action. (Rg. 1-2-9) 
642 :M arut, wind energy, is seen while moving alongwith the indomitable sun, both beautiful and joyous, divinities coexistent, equal in splendour by virtue of omnipresent Indra, Lord Supreme. (Rg.1-6-7) 
643 :Bearing the sacred vapours of yajna as is their wont and nature, the winds rise to the sky, hold the clouds in their womb, and after the rain carry on the cycle with the sun-rays and yajna-fire. (Rg. 1-6-4) 
644 :things in the sky, and the wind with its currents after the sunbeams reconstructs and replaces new forms of things in the sky. (Rg. 1-6-5) 
645 :I invoke, admire and celebrate Indra, cosmic energy, and Agni, cosmic heat and light, both manifestations of divine vision, will and action, by whose power and operation this whole universe has evolved as of eternity. The two do not hurt, injure or destroy us. (Rg. 6-60-4) 
646 :We invoke, invite and develop Indra and Agni, divine and blazing powers of nature's energy and light, both destroyers of adversaries and life's negativities. May they protect us and bless us with peace and prosperity in this world of our action and existence. (Rg. 6-60-5) 
647 :Indra and A gni, divine powers of omnipotent will and vision, of holy nature, character and action, defenders of Truth and Law, destroy evil, darkness and want, destroy pain, suffering and slavery, destroy and eliminate ail hate and enmity. (Rg. 6-60-6) 
648 :Intelligent and dedicated lovers of Soma refine and sublimate their pleasurable joy of the heart and emotion, direct it to divinity on top of the existential ocean of daily business and, thoughtful, ecstatic and divinely oriented, experience the heavenly ecstasy of Soma as in samadhi. (Rg. 9-107-14) 
649 :Across the ocean of existence, pure, purifying and flowing by waves of ecstasy, refulgent generous divine ruler of life, itself the law of expansive universe, radiating by and with the Dharma of M itra, spirit of love, and Varuna, spirit of justice, inspiring and stimulating the universal law of truth and advancement, rolls Soma. (Rg. 9-107-15) 
650 :Invoked and impelled by leading lights of intelIigent humanity, graciously charming, all watching, self-refulgent divine light of life, omnipresent in the universe, it rolls for Indra, the soul. (Rg. 9-107-16) 
651 :Soma inspires three orders of speech: practical speech that carries on the daily business of life, the thought that conceives of the vibrant immanent divine presence, and the deeper language of silence which is the mode of transcendent reality. The language operations of daily business move in search of the master source of world mystery as in science and philosophy, and the speech of thought and imagination and of love and worship moves to the presence of peace and bliss, Soma. (Rg. 9-97-34) 
652 :(The three speeches in Vedic language are Ida, Sarasvati, and M ahi or Bharati as described in Rgveda 1, 13, 9 and Yajurveda 21, 19. Explained another way these are the language of the Rks or knowledge, Yajus or karma, and Samans or worship.) 
653 :Dynamic and creative languages of love and faith celebrate Soma, the languages of scholars enquiring into reality with thought and analysis concentrate on Soma. It is Soma which, distilled from observation and experience and crystallised in nature and function, is sought to be comprehended or apprehended in the language medium. Indeed all speech media of description, definition, comprehension, apprehension, celebration or adoration arisefrom Soma and merge into Soma. (Rg. 9-97-35) 
654 :Thus, 0 Soma, served, adored and celebrated with your power and purity, let your presence radiate and purify us for our good and all round well being. Come and settle in the soul with the ecstasy of divinity. Generate and exalt the awareness and speech of vision and celebration communicative of high divine realisation. (Rg. 9-97-36) 
655 :Yad dyava indra te satam satam bhumiruta syuh. Na tva vajrintsahasram surya anu na jatamasta rodasi. Indra, lord of thunder, if there were a hundred heavens, and if there were a hundred earths, they would not be able to rival you. Not a thousand suns, nor heavens, earths and skies together would match you at the rise in manifestation. (Rg. 8-70-5) 
656 :Indra, destroyer of evil, darkness and suffering, we, your celebrants, having distilled the soma, spread and occupied the holy grass, we, sit and wait on the vedi for your presence in the flux of life as holy performers, while the flow of pure immortality continues all round in the dynamics of existence. (Rg. 8-33-1) 
657 :Indra, Vasu, giver of peace and security in self- settlement, while the soma of faith and love has been distilled in the heart and the devotees sing and celebrate your honour in hymns of praise, when would you, keen to join us at the celebration, come to the yajnic hall thirsting to meet the people you love and admire. (Rg. 8-33-2) 
658 :Indra, lord of universal vision, resolute will and irresistible action, ruler and commander of the world's wealth, power and force, we pray, conceive, plan and bring about for the intelligent people of action and ambition a social order of golden beauty and progressive achievement, full of a hundred-fold prosperity of lands and cows, education and culture, and invincible will, strength and advancement free from indecision and delay in action. (Rg. 8-33-3) 
659 :Only the saviour, a person of dynamic will and action joined in the soul with a controlled and dedicated mind, would share wealth and knowledge with the people and distribute it over the deserving. With words of prayer I bow to Indra, the ruler invoked by you all and draw his attention to you just like the carpenter bending flexiblewood round as felly of thewheel. (The lord is flexible too, his heart melts with sympathy for the people.) (Rg. 7-32-20) 
660 :By protest and violence the mortal does not win the wealth of life. N or does wealth oblige the inactive and malevolent. 0 lord of honour and excellence, right competence dedicated to Divinity is your gift for a person like me which is good on the day of the cross over. (Rg. 7-32-21) 
661 :Three Vedic voices of knowledge, action and prayer, loud and bold, enlighten and inspire to goodness, organs of perception and volition urge to good action, while earth and milch cows are profuse in fertility, and the lord of bliss, destroyer of suffering, manifests bright and blissful as life goes on in a state of prosperity. (Rg. 9-33-4) 
662 :Holy voices, creators and sustainers of the rule of truth and rectitude, ceaselessly flow around strong, refining and doing honour to the teacher, scholar and learner as they enlighten and sanctify the child of heaven, the rising generation. (Rg. 9-33-5) 
663 :Flow free, 0 Soma, divine power, pure and bright, bring us from all around the four oceans of wealth and knowledge a thousandfold. (Rg. 9-33-6) 
664 :Filtered, felt and cleansed, honey sweet soma streams, pure and exhilarating, flow for Indra, the soul, and may the exhilarations reach you, noble favourites of divinity. (Rg. 9-101-4) 
665 :Soma, divine, brilliant and blissful, flows for Indra, the soul, say the noble sages, and thus Soma, divine source and master of speech and thought, ruler and sustainer of the entire world by his own lustre and power, is honoured at all yajnas of knowledge, yoga and austerity, for advancement. (Rg. 9-101-5) 
666 :A thousand streams of Soma joy and enlightenment flow, inspiring and purifying. It is a bottomless ocean that rolls impelling the language and thought of new knowledge. It is the preserver, promoter and sustainer of all wealths and honours and a friend of the soul, inspiring and exalting us day by day. (Rg. 9-101-6) 
667 :Vast and expansive is your holy creation of existence and the voice divine, 0 Brhaspati, lord of expansive universe. You are the master and supreme controller who pervade and transcend its parts from the particle to the whole. The immature man who has not passed through the crucibles of discipline cannot reach to that presence, but the mature and seasoned ones who sti 11 mai ntai n the ordeal of f i re and abi de by the presence attain to it and the divine joy. (Rg. 9-83-1) 
668 :The holy light of the cosmic sun extends and lights the regions of heaven where the rays shine and blaze, radiate all round and abide in constancy. Those instant radiations in heavenly state protect the devotee of holy commitment. Indeed the devotees abide there on top of the state of heavenly light with their mind stabilised in peace and joy. (Rg. 9-83-2) 
669 :Lighting up the dawns, stars and planets in space, the sun, prime and abundant source of light, warmth of life and waters of sustenance, giver of food and energy shines over the regions of the world. By the light, power and causal effects of it on other objects in existence such as planets and satellites, scholars of science do their astronomical calculations, and parental, kind and studious scholars studying humanity and divinity realise the nature and character of Soma, the original seed of life and source of energy for the world of existence. (Rg. 9-83-3) 
670 :in honour of adorable Agni, most generous, leader of the paths of truth, great and glorious, lord of pure light of divinity and fire of action. (Rg. 8-103-8) 
671 :Lord of universal wealth and power, light of life, invoked and lighted, gives us honour and fame worthy of the brave. M ay his love and good will come and bless us with all possible honours, power and prosperity with progressive success. (Rg. 8-103-9) 
672 :Indra, lord of adamantine will and generous disposition like clouds of rain, we celebrate and glorify that power and heavenly joy of yours which is virile and generous, heroic in battles and steadfast against challenges, creative in the worlds of existence and gracious in advancement and gifts of bliss. (Rg.8-15-4) 
673 :We celebrate and adore that power and divine joy of yours by which you reveal the light of life to the mortals from generation to generation and, exalted by which, you shine and rule over the yajnic dynamics of this universe. (Rg. 8-15-5) 
674 :That divine power and joyous generosity of yours, today, saints and scholars of the holy Word and song sing and celebrate as ever before. 0 lord, conquer and control the waters of space collected in the mighty clouds and let them flow day by day. (Rg. 8-15-6) 
675 :Indra, listen to the invocation of the devotee's voice of deep silence who offers service and homage to you, and bless the devotee with wealth of brave progeny, lands, cows, knowledge and total fulfilment. You are great, unbounded is your munificence. (Rg. 8-95-4) 
676 :Indra, whoever creates and offers you the latest song of joyous adoration, you bless with a mind and intelligence for eternal illumination, universal understanding and wisdom, and dedication to exuberant awareness of eternal truth and law. (Rg. 8-95-5) 
677 :We adore and worship Indra whom hymns and songs of adoration exalt, and we pray to him for the gift of many forms of strength, honour and excellence. (Rg. 8-95-6) 
678 :The rays of the light of Soma, lord existent, immovable, pure and purifying, pervading over both earth and the skies, radiate all round. When it is felt and adored, exalted in the pure heart, then the sanctifier presence settles and abides in the sacred hearts of the celebrants, the real seat of its own love and choice. (Rg. 9-86-6) 
679 :Visva dhamani visvacaksa rbhvasah prabhoste sat ah pari yanti ketavah. VyanasT pavase soma dharmana patirvisvasya bhuvanasya rajasi. Let Soma, progressive, active and zealous power dedicated to humanity and divinity, create the light and culture of universal expansive order from the light of heaven, sublime, awful and beautiful as the light and resounding roar of thunder and lightning. (Rg.9-61-16) 
680 :We adore the ceaseless radiations of divinity which, like restless rays of the sun, blazing with lustrous glory, move and shower on the earth and dispel the dark cover of the night. (Rg. 9-41-1) 
681 :We honour and adore that divine bridge to peace and prosperity, otherwise difficult to cross, which faces and overcomes selfish, uncreative and destructive elements of life addicted to lawlessness. (Rg. 9-41-2) 
682 :The music of divinity, pure, purifying and edifying, is heard like showers of rain on earth, like flashes of lightning and roar of thunder which shine and rumble over the sky. This is the reflection of the might, majesty and generosity of Soma. (Rg. 9-41-3) 
683 :of intelligence, flow fast forward with your own essential and dear light and lustre of form and come where the divines dwell, and proclaim your presence. (Rg. 9-39-1) 
684 :Go forward cleansing, purifying and perfecting the uninitiated, leading peopleto strive for food, energy and advancement. Indeed, bring the showers of the light of heaven on earth. (Rg. 9-39-2) 
685 :Ay am sa yo divas pari raghuydmd pavitra a. Sindhorurma vyaksarat. This Soma is the spirit of joy which, at instant and universal speed, descends and manifests in the devotee's pure soul from the light of divinity and stimulates oceanic waves of ecstasy to roil in the heart. (Rg. 9-39-4) 
686 :Soma, universal watchful guardian and lightgiver of the world, discovered and realised in the self, wearing its celestial light and lustre, manifests and shines in the pure soul of the devotee. (Rg. 9-39-3) 
687 :Self-manifested, illuminating the soul from far as well as from near, it rains showers of honey sweets of divine ecstasy for the soul. (Rg. 9-39-5) 
688 :D evoted yajakas i n faith and perfect form together adore and glorify Soma, eliminator of pain, and with adamantine practice of meditation stimulate its presence to power for the pleasure and ecstasy of the mind and soul. (Rg. 9-39-6) 
689 :Just as lights of the dawn like loving sisters forerun and herald and exalt the sun, so do the senses, mind and intelligence together in service of the great soul reveal the power and presence of the supreme lord of the universe, blissful father sustainer of existence. (Rg. 9-65-1) 
690 :May the seif-refulgent lord supreme over all divinities of nature and humanity, pure and purifying, by his divine beauty and glory bring us ail wealth, honour and excellence of the world and bless our heart and soul. (Rg. 9-65-2) 
691 :Agni, fire energy, friend and protector of man, ever awake, versatile power, it arises for the latest good of humanity. Feeding and rising on the fuel of ghrta, shining pure and magnificent with heat and light touching the skies, it shines and gives light for those who feed and keep the fire burning. (Rg. 5-11-1) 
692 :A ngira, life breath of the universe, light and fire of the world, A gni, pervading every forest, every ray of light and every living being, holy yajakas dedicated to you as to the breath of life awaken and realise you through meditation in the cave of the heart when you are hidden as a mysterious flame, and you, stirred through contemplation, concentrated and enkindled, rise as a great power of light and victory. Rightly they call you manifestation of the omnipotent. (Rg. 5-11-6) 
693 :A gni is the leader, mark of the science of yajna, first highpriest in the process, which the leading lights among people kindle and establish in three stages of life in three departments of the acquisition of knowledge, observance of Dharmaand performance of karma, in three regions of earth, sky and the solar sphere. A nd A gni takes the pri me seat on the grass on the vedi with Indra, power, devas, divine givers of nature, as it comes with its chariot which carries it with fragrance to all regions. It is the sanctifier for yajnic initiation, conduct and congregation, and itisthevery light, beauty and grace of the holy project. (Rg. 5-11-2) 
694 :Indra and Vayu, power and progress, M itra and Varuna, love and justice in freedom of choice, all embracing and hating none, abide in the house of inviolable peace and stability firmly resting on a thousand pillars. (Rg. 2-41-5) 
695 :light and peace, the sun and moon of the world, who distil the very essence of life like ghrta and aqua pura, protect and promote the generous chari tabl e peopl e w ho follow the simple, straight and natural paths of life free from crookedness. (Rg. 2-41-6) 
696 :Indra, lord of light and space, unchallenged and unchallengeable, wields the thunderbolt and, with weapons of winds, light and thunder, breaks the clouds of ninety-nine orders of water and electricity for the sake of humanity and the earth. (Rg. 1-84-13) 
697 :J ust as the sun reaches and breaks the densest concentrations of vapours in the clouds fast moving in the regions of the sky, so should the ruler know the best part of his fastest forces stationed on the mountains and of the enemy forces lurking around and in the forests if he desires victory. (Rg. 1-84-14) 
698 :J ust as here on the surface of the earth and in its environment, we know, there is the beautiful light of the sun penetrating and reaching everywhere, similarly, let all know, it is there on the surface of the moon. (Just as the sun holds and illuminates the earth and the moon, so should the ruler with his light of justice and power hold and brighten every home in the land.) (Rg.1-84-15) 
699 :Indra and A gni, lordsof action and enlightenment, this principal and ancient song of adoration for you from the celebrant flows spontaneously like rain from the cloud. (Rg. 7-94-1) 
700 :Indragni, lords of action and enlightenment, listen to the celebrant's song of adoration, accept and appreciate the words, 0 sovereign lords, and refine and energise his thought and imagination to flow into expression and action. (Rg. 7-94-2) 
701 :Indragni, leaders of humanity, pioneers of progress and enlightenment, deliver us not to the si nner, not to the tyrant, not to the reviler. Let us be free. (Rg. 7-94-3) 
702 :Soma, omniscient poetic creator, generous and dear, dearest of divinities and destroyer of the evil and darkness of life, vibrating in the cave of the heart shines glorious in the soul and reflects beatific with the senses, mind, intelligence and will in the conduct and grace of the human personality in total freedom from suppression and inhibitions. (Rg. 9-25-3) 
703 :Tavaham soma rarana sakhya indo dive dive. Puruni babhro ni caranti mamavaparidhih rati tan ihi. Tavaham naktamuta soma te diva duhano babhra udhani. Ghrna tapantamati suryam parah sakuna iva paptima. And I, 0 Soma, bearer and sustainer, yearn day and night to abide in your presence for the sake of your love and friendship, and pray that we may rise, flying like birds beyond the sun blazing with its refulgence, and reach you, the Ultimate. (Rg. 9-107-20) 
704 :ail watching, faces and overcomes all adversaries of thecarnal world. Sages celebrate and glorify thevibrant all prevailing spirit with songs of adoration. (Rg.9-40-1) 
705 :The glorious light of divinity, self-manifested and self-existent, pervades its natural abode, the world of Prakrti, and the generous spirit pervades the human soul too, and while it seats itself in the unshakable faith of man, the human soul too, purified and sanctified, abides in the eternal presence of divinity. (Rg. 9-40-2) 
706 :Soma, lord of universal glory, blissful omnipresence, bring us great wealth, honour and excellence of the world from all around, letitflow to us in a thousand streams. (Rg. 9-40-3) 
707 :Indra, lord ruler and controller of the dynamic forces of the world, drink this soma of ecstasy which, I am sure, would exhilarate you. The cloud, generative power of nature, has distilled it and showered on you. And just as a horse well controlled by the hands and reins of the driver moves to the right destination, so is this soma generated by the hands of the creator meant to exhort you to take the dominion to its destination. (Rg. 7-22-1) 
708 :That beauty and joy of the governance of your dominion which is agreeable, inspiring and worthy of support and participation, and by which joy, 0 controller of the dynamic forces of the people, you break the negative forces of darkness, sin and crime, want and ignorance like the sun breaking dark cloudsfor showers, may that joy, 0 sovereign lord of power for settlement and prosperity, give you the real pleasure of creative governance and administration. (Rg. 7-22-2) 
709 :Bodha su me maghavan vacamemam yam te vasistho arcatiprasastim. Ima brahma sadha- mdde jusasva. All the citizens together, in order to elect an equal for the purpose of governance, create and shape I ndra, the ruler, the I eader w ho is superi or to others i n al I battl es of life, highest by noble creative action, eliminator of negative and frustrative opposition, illustrious, most vigorous and emphatic in expression, courageous and passionate in action. (Rg. 8-97-10) 
710 :Wise and vibrant sages greet the heroic ruler, Indra, giver of showers of peace and joy, and with vision of the future, bow to him as the central power and force of the nation's wheel. 0 brilliant and inspired people free from jealousy and calumny, smart and bold in action, do him honour with laudable performance for the near. (Rg. 8-97-12) 
711 :Let all intelligent people cordially welcome and f el i c i tate I n d ra f o r th e protecti o n of th e h o no u r, i nteg r i ty, beauty and culture of the nation of humanity, and when they, together, exhort the guardian of their happiness and welfare to advance the beauty of corporate I ife, then, committed to the values, laws and ideals of the nation, he feels exalted with lustrous courage and positive measures of defence and protection. (Rg. 8-97-11) 
712 :I adore I ndra, lord supreme, who rules the people, and who is the irresistible and universal mover by waves of cosmic energy, saviour of all humanity, supreme warrior and winner of cosmic battles of the elemental forces and who destroys the evil, darkness and poverty of the world. (Rg. 8-70-1) 
713 :Soma, cosmic soul, darling of the heavens and loved of enlightened people, poetic creator, immanent in his own creations, pervading all regions of the universe, moves around omnipresent, inspiring, creating and doing all those acts which are exclusively worthy of the omniscient and omnipotent creator. (Rg. 9-9-1) 
714 :He, creator of the universe, pure and great, self- manifested, illuminates the great and glorious heaven and earth, mothers of the created world which observe and exalt the eternal laws of existence. (Rg. 9-9-3) 
715 :Soma is that spirit of enlightenment by which the meditative sages on way to divinity open up the path to immortality, by which the saints attain to the peace and well being worthy of divinities, and by which the lovers of immortality obtain their desired ambition and fulfilment. (Rg. 9-108-4) 
716 :Soma, pure and purifying, protective and blissful, flowing by streams and sanctifying, roaring with ancient and original hymns of divine adoration, rushes to the heart core of the distinguished soul. (Rg. 9-106-10) 
717 :M en of distinguished mind, adoring Soma with holy thoughts, words and action, invoke and celebrate all protective Soma, victorious spirit and cosmic energy, playing in the beautiful world over three regions of heaven, earth and the skies. (Rg. 9-106-11) 
718 :Soma, vibrant spi rit of di vi nity, rushes to the heart core of realised souls like instant energy radiating to the centre of its target in the human battle of survival and distinguished search for immortality, there stimulating, creating and sanctifying hymns of adoration, and there in the soul it abides.(Rg.9-106-12) 
719 :Soma, spirit of divine peace, power and generous creativity, flows and purifies universally. It is generator of heavens, maker of the earth and creator of the nobilities of sagely wisdom, generator of fire, maker of the stars, manifester of its own omnipotence, and manifester of the omnipresence of its own self in expansive space. (Rg. 9-96-5) 
720 :Soma is Brahma, supreme over divinities, highest of the poets, divine seer among the wise, lion among the strongest animals, eagle among the birds of power, sword among the killers and, roaring and thundering, it goes forward, excels all others, and blesses the pure heart core of the soul. (Rg. 9-96-6) 
721 :Soma stirs and inspires the flow of thought into speech as the sea stirs and rolls the waves of the flood. Pure and purifying, it inspires imagination, poetry and adoration. Pervading all within and watching, it abides in the closest intimacies of all yajna within and without and, potent as it is, knowing every thing, it energises all organs of thought and sense. (Rg. 9-96-7) 
722 :Well with joint action and yajna, serveAgni, most ancient power of the first order that leads you to the advancement of strong familial unity and tolerant but powerful social cooperation for your coming generations for ages. (Rg. 8-102-7) 
723 :his plastic materials, giving them beauty, power and purposeful meaning, so does this A gni, universal artist, work on us, for us, and brings out our potentials and gives us forms of beauty, power and excellence as a family, community and common humanity for a purpose, a meaning and a direction. His actions are great, gracious and glorious. (Rg. 8-102-8) 
724 :This Agni among all the divinities of nature and humanity creates, sustains and rules overall the beauties, graces and grandeurs of life. M ay the lord come to us and bless us with all kinds of knowledge, power, wealth and honour. (Rg. 8-102-9) 
725 :the ecstasy of joy distilled, highest and immortal. The streams of pure and brilliant power and glory flow towards you in the house of Truth and Law. (Rg. 1-84-4) 
726 :Indra, while you yoke and drive the horses, powers of the chariot of your dominion, none could be a better master of the chariot. None could equal you in power, courage and force. N one as master of horse and chariot could claim even to approach you in power, efficiency and glory. (Rg. 1-84-6) 
727 :All ye children of the earth, in truth and sincerity, do reverence and homage to Indra, ruling lord of light and life. Speak words of thanks and praise in appreciation of his dominion. Let the drops of distilled soma give him delight and ecstasy. Bow to him, lord Indra, omnipotent lord of cosmic dynamics, come, join our yajna congregation, drink of honey sweets of homage and soma distilled for divine ecstasy and, intent on fulfillment as you get from soma, march on (over the negativities, jealousies and enmities). Indra, divine ruler of the world, drink of the adorable honey sweets of soma like heavenly nectar to your heart's content, and may the admirable ecstasy of this soma stay with you I ike the eternal bliss of heavenly freedom of M oksha. Indra, instant fighter in response, dispels darkness as the sun, like a sage he breaks off negativities, and like a passionate scholar, he removes doubts and ignorance at a stroke, in his passion and enthusiasm of Soma, joyous positive values of life. humanity all round in all ways. 0 lord pure and purifying, vigorous and generous, you cleanse us with all those powers of yours. Pray purify and energise us so that we may be prosperous with peaceful settlement and golden graces of wealth, honour and excellence to live happy in the regions of the world. (Rg. 9-86-38) 
728 :Lord of the universe, pure, refulgent and purifying, as you manifest in the flux of existence your creations of peace and beauty flow and radiate like rays Creating the lights of your existential presence over the regions of heaven above, you reveal your power by the beauty of forms you create, 0 Soma, universal home of infinite bliss, and expand the possibilities of life's joy. (Rg. 9-64-8) 
729 :I nvoked i n yaj na and i nspi ri ng songs of adorati on you love, pure, purifying and pervasive in the world of various forms and functions, your voice rolling and revealing, you radiate as the refulgent sun and transcend the world in existence. (Rg. 9-64-9) 
730 :Soma currents of purity, power and beauty of divinity, purifying and inspiring streams of life's joy, sparkling, and enlightening humanity, when absorbed, and integrated in human thought, word and action reflect in life and glorify noble people. (Rg. 9-24-1) 
731 :The ecstasy and power of soma vibrations energise the mind and senses of the celebrant, purifying and perfecting them, and, thus purified, the senses and mind move to the presence of omnipotent all-joyous Indra like streams and rivers flowing, rushing and joining the sea. (Rg. 9-24-2) 
732 :Flow into the heart, beatify the soul, 0 greatest destroyer of the di rt and darkness of I ife, i n response to our songs of adoration. 0 Spirit of absolute joy, you are pure, sanctifier and absolutely sublime. (Rg. 9-24-6) 
733 :Soma, creator and energiser of existence, ambrosial honey for the enlightened celebrants, is hailed as purifier, sanctifier and protector of the divines and destroyer of sin, scandal, jealousy and enmity. (Rg. 9-24-7) 
734 :Soma, creative poet and universal visionary, all protective, withstanding all rivalry and opposition, moves on with protection, advancement and choice gifts for the creative souls for their divine fulfilment. (Rg.9-20-1) 
735 :He alone, pure, purifying and dynamic, brings for the celebrants thousandfold food, energy and advancement with victory inspired and infused with intelligence, knowledge, culture and enlightenment. (Rg. 9-20-2) 
736 :Bring wide and expansive fame for the men of honour and generosity, bring wealth and power, bring food, energy, knowledge and excellence of mind and soul for the celebrants. (Rg. 9-20-4) 
737 :That lord Soma, burden bearer of existence, is theuniversal inspirer, energiserand enlightener,thevery passion and fire of life, pervasive in the waters of space, unconquerable, blazing in the self-circuit of his own refulgence, and he abides in the holy ladles of yajna as much as in the mighty majestic armies of the universe. (Rg. 9-20-6) 
738 :divinity, and inspire and infuse the hymns of Veda and songs of the devotees with the spirit of divinity and creative exuberance. (Rg. 9-20-7) 
739 :Soma, Spirit of peace, power and plenty, flow forth, vitalise, purify and inspire us with fresh energy, power and grace of culture at every stage of our growth, acquisition and progress, beatify all our good fortune and prosperity of life in the world. (Rg. 9-55-1) 
740 :And 0 Soma, lord of energy, wealth and advancement, master of knowledge and progress, by the shortest ti me of the days ahead, bless and beatify us with food for body, mind and soul, rich in lands, cows and culture, horses, advancement and progressive power and achievement. (Rg. 9-55-3) 
741 :You, who always excel, win orvanquish, who no one can excel, win or vanquish, who advance and destroy the destructive adversary, pray advance, energise, purify and empower us too, winner of a thousand battles. (Rg. 9-55-4) 
742 :Your wonderful lustre and beauties shine like lightning flashes of the clouds of rain, like lights of the rising dawns, specially, when, radiating warm and free, you reach and shine upon the herbs and trees and fields of grain and receive them into the shining warmth of your maturing and ripening radiations. (Rg. 10-91-5) 
743 :When urged and impelled by wind, Agni, you rush fast to objects of your choice love and consumption, then your youthful unaging flames, burning and blazing, rush on like the horses of a monarch's chariot. (Rg. 10-91-7) 
744 :Devotees choose to worship Agni alone, none other than Agni, giver of intelligence, accomplisher of yajnaand education for knowledge, high priest of yajnic existence, supreme over all, omniscient wise, and equally loving for all, whether the havi offered is small or great, whether the purpose is high or low. 0 lord of light, they choose none other than you. (Rg. 10-91-8) 
745 :Indra, lord of the universe, rising with your might and majesty, protect and energise both heaven and earth and promote the soma of life's vitality created in both heaven and earth by nature and humanity by yajna. (Rg. 8-76-10) 
746 :Indra, when you stimulate and energise the soma vitality of life created by nature and humanity, and when you rise as destroyer of the negativities of the counterforce, then both heaven and earth vibrate and celebrate your majesty in awe with admiration. (Rg. 8-76-11) 
747 :I study, measure, develop and pray for the advancement of language revealed in eight works, i.e., four Vedas and four Upavedas, spoken across four classes of humanity and through four stages of the individual's development from birth to death, developing over nine blooming branches like flower garlands across nine regions of the earth, ultimately touching the truth of divine reality, the Word Imperishable descended from and ascending to Indra, lord of omniscience across the countless branches of dialects and structures. (Rg. 8-76-12) 
748 :Indra and Agni, powers of will and vision of action in nature and humanity, these songs of adoration celebrate you. 0 givers of peace, prosperity and well being, drink of the nectar of this joy and bliss distilled. (Rg. 6-60-7) 
749 :Indra and Agni, leading powers of humanity, come to the generous giver and celebrant yajaka with all those gifts and powers of yours which are loved and cherished by all. (Rg. 6-60-8) 
750 :Indra and A gni, leading lights, with those cherished gifts and powers come and join this yajnic session to drink of the soma of joy distilled.(Rg.6-60-9) 
751 :Soma, spirit of divine power and peace of purity, most potent and most refulgent, come roaring at the speed and force of thunder and abide in the flames of yajna and heart of the faithful celebrant purify and Soma, spirit of the innate peace and power of divinity, by its own will and energy, radiates to the heart and soul of the devotee to vest it with the power of cosmic energy (Indra), the speed of winds (Vayu), pioneering spirit of the storm (M aruts), the depth of space (Varuna), and the love of omnipresent divinity (Vishnu). (Rg. 9-65-20) 
752 :Soma, invoked by celebrants, manifests with blissful inspiring powers of protection and promotion and, saving, watching, fascinating, goes forward, rushing, compelling, in an impetuous stream like waves of energy, and it also goes forward by a stream of mild motion, soothing and refreshing. (Rg. 9-107-8) 
753 :Soma, divine master of holy speech, emerges in the depth of the heart with the voice of divinity and blesses the devotee with the revelation of the milk of spiritual sustenance. J ust as streams of water flow and reach the sea, so is the divine stream and spirit of joy invoked and celebrated for the central bliss of the soul. (Rg. 9-107-9) 
754 :for us the wealth, honour and excellence both worldly and heavenly which is wonderfully versatile, valuable and admirable, pray sanctify it and bless us with the sacred gift. (Rg. 9-19-1) 
755 :Indra, the hero who destroys Vtra, the cloud of want and suffering, and releases the showers of plenty and prosperity, goes forward with the people for the achievement of strength and joy of the land of freedom and self-government. And him we invoke and exhort in the battles of life, great and small, so that he may defend and advance us in all our struggles for progress and lead us to victory. (Rg. 1-81-1) 
756 :Indra, you are the valiant hero. You arethewarrior taking on many enemies and oppositions at a time. Even the small, you raise to greatness. You lead the creative and generous yajamana to knowledge and power. H ero of the battles of existence, may your wealth, power and honour grow higher and higher. (Rg. 1-81-2) 
757 :When battles confront the nation, means and money are raised and prizes won for the brave. Commander of the forces, yoke the forces exuberant and raging for war. Destroy the enemy. Settle the victorious in wealth and peace. Indra, pray settle us in peace and comfort. (Rg. 1-81-3) 
758 :The golden and brilliant people and forces of the land drink of the delicious, exciting and universal honey sweets of national pride and prestige and joyously celebrate thei r achievements i n the company of generous and valorous I ndra for the advancement of the honour and glory of the republic in obedience to the demands and discipline of the freedom and self-government of the nation. (Rg. 1-84-10) 
759 :Those forces of Indra, the ruler, close together in contact and unison, of varied forms and colours, brilliant as sunrays and generous and productive as cows, who are dearest favourites of the ruler, create the soma of joy and national dignity and hurl the missile of the thunderbolt upon the invader as loyal citizens of the land in accordance with the demands and discipline of freedom and self-government. (Rg. 1-84-11) 
760 :Those forces, noble and intelligent, serve and augment the courage and power of this I ndra with food, energy and armaments and, as citizens of the land, as a matter of duty to the freedom and discipline of the republic, predictably join many dedicated projects and programmes of his in anticipation of success. (Rg. 1-84-12) 
761 :The peace and pleasure of life's ecstasy in thought and action, and the expertise well founded on adamantine determination is created by Savita, the creator, like the flying ambition of the soul and it is settled in its seat at the heart's core in the personality. (Rg. 9-62-4) 
762 :The radiant food of ambition created by people, energised by noble leaders, sanctified in action, the people enjoy seasoned with delicacies of cow's milk. (Rg. 9-62-5) 
763 :honey sweet of joint achievement in yajnic action, leading lights of the nation likeyajakasexaltand glorify as the progressive sociopolitical order of humanity for permanence and immortal honour. (Rg. 9-62-6) 
764 :intelligence for the seeker of enlightenment. (Rg. 9-108-10) 
765 :M aker of stars and planets, inspiring thelight and law of the dynamics of existence, dear adorable giver of fulfilment, Soma rules over both spirit and nature, heaven and earth. (Rg. 9-102-1) 
766 :Close to the adamantine integration of Purusha and Prakrti in human form is the secret seat of heart and clairvoyant intelligence wherein the climactic presence of the master of three orders of Prakrti and super presence of divinity, and there it is shared by seven prakrtic, pranic and psychic orders of existence and adored by seven metres of Vedic hymns as the dearest supreme object of worship. (Rg. 9-102-2) 
767 :B y three streams of the movi ng parti cl es of matter, energy and mind does the triple master, Soma, move the dynamics of existence, and thus does the supreme yajaka order and accomplish his cosmic plan. (Rg. 9-102-3) 
768 :Soma, all inspiring spirit of the universe, sweetest presence distilled and realised in the holy heart, flow on purifying by the stream of exhilaration, giving food, energy and fulfilment for the soul, for the universal vibrancy of nature and humanity, and for all the noble, generous and enlightened people. (Rg. 9-100-6) 
769 :universal sanctity, just as mother cows love and caress a new born calf, so do the motherly forces of nature and humanity free from the negativities of malice and jealousy love and cherish you arising in the heart and inspiring the soul in various dharmic situations of life. (Rg. 9-100-7) 
770 :Indu, brilliant Soma, energetic and victorious, pure and purifying, vibrant and dynamic, creating strength, patience and endurance for the soul's joy, is ever on the move. It destroys evil, prevents negativities and opposition and casts them far off, and, giving wealth, honour and excellence of the best order of our choice, rules as the brilliant creator, controller and dispenser of strength, courage, power and life saving vitality in existence. (Rg. 9-97-10) 
771 :And by streams of honey shower, joining spiritual awareness, overflowing the heart cave, Soma, distilled from the adamanti ne practice of meditative self-control, flows pure, purifying, wholly fulfilling. The brilliant divinespiritof joy cherishing friendly communion with Indra, the Soul, is the ecstasy meant for the joyous fulfilment of the soul. (Rg. 9-97-11) 
772 :Soma, pure, purifying and fulfilling the noble sages with its nectar of ecstasy. M ay the brilliant joyous divinity, pervading and shining with virtues according to time and season, purify and fulfill us on top of this protective world of ten senses, ten pranas and ten gross and subtle elements. (Rg. 9-97-12) 
773 :Let us kindle you, light and fire of life, generous divinity, refulgent and unaging so that the wonderfully admirable light of your blaze shines in heaven and you bring food and energy for the celebrants. (Rg. 5-6-4) 
774 :Agni, light of life, lord of power, purity and splendour, golden beautiful, generous, sustainer of the people and carrier of fragrant oblations across the spaces, fragrant offers are made to you with the chant of holy verses in praise of your identity, attributes and functions. Generous creative power, create and bring food and energy for the celebrants. (Rg. 5-6-5) 
775 :Agni, mighty lord of golden glory inform, creator and wielder of universal energy, you catalyse two ladlefuls of liquid fuel in your crucible for impulsion and expulsion in cosmic metabolism. Thus, 0 lord, fulfil us too in holy tasks of yajna and create and bring food and energy for the celebrants. (Rg. 5-6-9) 
776 :Sing Brhatsama hymns in adoration of Indra, vibrant spirit of the universe and giver of fulfilment, grand and infinite, source ordainer and keeper of the law of universal Dharma, giver and protector of knowledge and karma, the lord adorable. (Rg. 8-98-1) 
777 :Indra, you are the lord supreme dominant over all, you give light to the sun, you are the maker of the universe, you are the one adorable light and spirit of the world, you are the one great and glorious life of the world. (Rg. 8-98-2) 
778 :Refulgent with your own light you pervade the regions of bliss and beatify the glory of heaven. Indra, the lights and divinities of the world vye and struggle for friendship with you. (Rg. 8-98-3) 
779 :Asavi soma indra te savistha dhrsnava gahi. A tvd Prnaktvindriyaih rajah suryo na rasmi- bhih. Indra, lord ruler of power, strong and resolute, come, this soma has been distilled for you. May it exhilarate and strengthen your mind as the sun fills and brightens the sky with its rays. (Rg. 1-84-1) 
780 :A tistha vrtrahan ratham yukta te brahmana hafi. Arvacinam su te mano grava krnotu vag- nuna. I ndra, lord ruler, breaker of the cloud, releaser of the waters of life, ride your chariot of the latest design and come. The horses are yoked with the right mantra and necessary stuffs. And may the high-priest of knowledge with his words of knowledge exhilarate you at heart. (Rg. 1-84-3) 
781 :The horses carry Indra, lord of informidableforce and resolution of mind, to the Rshis 1 songs of praise and yajnic programmes of the people. (Rg. 1-84-2) 
782 :Light of human and cosmic yajna, Soma vibrates pure, purifying and omnipresent, dearest most delicious honeyed spirit of life, creator and sustainer of divinities and master of infinite wealth and power. It holds and commands the jewel wealth of its own power and potential hidden in earth and heaven and vibrates in the mysteries of nature and humanity - divinity most joyous, ecstatic, glorious, pure bliss that it is. (Rg. 9- 86 - 10 ) 
783 :Roaring, the omnipotent pervades in the universe and flows with a thousand streams, all watching sustainer of the light of existence. Beatific, glorious, dispeller of darkness and sufferance, it abides in the homes of love and friendship, cleansing, purifying and consecrating with its protective favours and showers of grace, infinitely potent and generous since it is. (Rg. 9-86-11) 
784 :Soma, primespiritof theworld in existence, pure and purifying, moves as the first cause of flowing waters, first cause of the flow of thought and speech, and it moves as the prime cause of the motions of stars and planets. First, before the start of evolution, it takes on the great warlike dynamics of the creative evolutionary flow of existence. The same omnipotent generous power, mighty of arms, is adorned and exalted in yajna by celebrants on the vedi designed by the lord and structured by his Shakti, Prakrti. (Rg. 9-86-12) 
785 :Vibrant heroes blest with the soma spirit of peace, progress and brilliance, pure and potent, inspired with ambition for lands, cows and culture, horses, advancement and achievement, and advancement of the brave generations of humanity move forward with the spirit of generous creativity. (Rg. 9-64-4) 
786 :Blest and beatified by lovers of truth and divine law, seasoned and tempered by light of the sun and heat of fire, heroic men of the soma spirit of peace and prosperity work vibrant on choice positions in the imperishable order of divine existence. (Rg. 9-64-5) 
787 :May the soma spirits of nature and humanity initiate, purify and direct all world's wealth, honour and excellence, peace and progress, of earthly, heavenly and middle order of the skies to flow to the generous and creative people of yajna and self-sacrifice. (Rg.9-64-6) 
788 :Blissful Spirit of divinity, give us food for the mind and soul, greatyou are, delightful, generous, most subl ime, the origin, wielder and sustainer of the universe and the truth of universal knowledge. (Rg. 9-2-2) 
789 :The stream of soma purity, bliss and knowledge, distilled and flowing from the omniscient, showers honey sweets of life on us, and the holiness of the noble soma internalised inspires our actions. (Rg. 9-2-3) 
790 :Just as great floods of water, rivers and seas join the great ocean, and the great ocean abides by you, 0 lord omnipotent, similarly all our will and actions abide in you, lord supreme, since by your word and powers you inspire them. (Rg. 9-2-4) 
791 :The lord is Samudra, universal space, from which everything follows. He is integrated with our streams of earthly waters, self-sustained and all sustaining, holder and sustainer of the regions of heavenly light. The lord giver of peace and bliss is ours, with us, in the holy business of our life and karma. (Rg. 9-2-5) 
792 :Soma, Spirit of universal peace and bliss, is generous and virile, destroyer of suffering, great, noble guide asafri end, and proclaims his presence everywhere as he shines glorious with the sun. (Rg. 9-2-6) 
793 :Lord giver of peace and grandeur, your voices of the Veda, exponent of karma, by virtue of your divine lustre purify and sanctify the people. By the same voices you shine in divine glory for the joy of humanity. (Rg. 9-2-7) 
794 :For the sake of joy and elimination of the suffering of life, we adore you, creator of the worlds of nature and humanity. 0 lord, great are your glories sung all round. (Rg. 9-2-8) 
795 :For us, 0 lord of peaceand bliss, munificentgiver of lustre and grandeur, bring showers of purity and the honey sweets of life as a cloud laden with showers of rain. (Rg. 9-2-9) 
796 :Soma, spiritof divineloveandjoy, give us eternal light, give us heavenly joy, and give us all good fortunes of the world and make us happy and prosperous more and ever more. (Rg. 9-4-2) 
797 :Soma, spirit of peace and excellence, give us strength and efficiency, protect and promote our noble actions, and ward off all sin, violence and evil forces, and thus make us happy and successful, more and ever more. (Rg. 9-4-3) 
798 :and by your protections and promotions, bless us that we may ever see and internalise the eternal light of the sun, and thus make us happy and prosperous more and ever more. (Rg. 9-4-6) 
799 :Soma, creative and inspiring spirit of the world, noble wielder and controller of the dynamics of life, bless us with wealth and vision good enough for both this life and the life beyond, and thus make us happy and prosperous for the life divine for ever. (Rg. 9-4-7) 
800 :Soma, spirit of divinity, infallible and victorious in the conflicts of nature and humanity, bring us wealth of imperishable and unconquerable character and make us happy and prosperous for ever. (Rg. 9-4-8) 
801 :Soma, spirit of purity and purifying power for all, celebrants exalt you by yajnic performance in order that you protect them to abide within their bounds of Dharma. Pray protect us in our Dharma and make us happy and prosperous more and ever more. (Rg. 9-4-9) 
802 :Soma, spirit of divine peace and bliss, bring us wealth, honour and excellence of wonderful, progressive and universal character and thus make us eternally happy and prosperous more and ever more. (Rg. 9-4-10) 
803 :Soma, Spirit of peace, beauty and bliss, saving, rejoicing, fulfilling, flows on. The stream of delight exhilarating for body, mind and soul flows on full of bliss. Crossing over the hurdles of life, delighted all over, the celebrant goes on. (Rg. 9-58-1) 
804 :M other source of wealth, honour and enlightenment, divine power that commands the saving art for the mortals, saviour, delightful, giver of fulfilmentflows on. (Rg. 9-58-2) 
805 :L et us receive a thousand gifts of the divine soma power that destroys evil and exalts humanity. Saving, delighting and fulfilling, thestream of divine bliss flows on. (Rg. 9-58-3) 
806 :The divine Soma energy and power, destroyer of evil and saviour of human good, of which we get thirty virtues and a thousand other gifts, flows on saving, These somasof human beauty, culture and graces celebrated in song are created for the great sustenance of power, honour and excellence of life by the stream of the most exciting annals of human history. (Rg. 9-62-22) 
807 :This song of celebration and worship in honour of venerableJ ataveda, A gni, omnipresent in the created world and lord omniscient, we sing in praise of his glory with our mind and soul in sincerity and offer it to him as a joyous holiday chariot fit for his majesty. Blessed isourmind in hiscompany, whilewesitintheassembly of devotees. Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may we never come to suffering while we enjoy your company and friendship. (Rg. 1-94-1) 
808 :Lighting the fire, observing and learning step by step, yajna by yajna, the full and fuller preparation, we collect the fuel and create the inputs of yajna for Agni. Agni, lord of light and fire, refine our mind and intelligence to be more subtle and sophisticated for the sake of better and better life. Agni, we pray we may never suffer a set back or loss of success while we are in your company. (Rg. 1-94-4) 
809 :Sakema tva samidham sadhaya dhiyastve deva haviradantyahutam. Tvamadityah a vaha tan hyusmasyagne sakhye ma risama vayam tava. Agni, lord of light and knowledge, we pray, may webeableto kindleand develop the fire power of yajna. Pray refine our intelligence and bless us with success in our intellectual endeavours. Whatever we offer in yajna, the divinities receive and share. Bring over the scholars of the highest order of brilliance and realise the light of the stars on earth. We love them, honour and cherish them. Agni, we pray, may we never suffer any want or misery in your company. (Rg. 1-94-3) 
810 :Te syama deva varuna te mitra suribhih saha. Isarii svasca dhimahi. M itra, just friend of humanity, give us the will and wisdom thatwith all ourwiseand brave we be dear and dedicated to you and we meditate to achieve the strength and bliss of Divinity. (Rg. 7-66-9) 
811 :Break off all the jealous adversaries, remove all obstacles, eliminate the enemies and violence and fill the world with cherished wealth, honour and prosperity. (Rg. 8-45-40) 
812 :That immense wealth discovered by you and collected, of which the people of the world know, bring that cherished treasure into the open and fill the world with it for all. (Rg. 8-45-42) 
813 :Whatever wanted wealth hidden in solid mountains, concealed in secret and trustworthy sources or covered in caverns and deep in the clouds, bring that out in the open for the society. (Rg. 8-45-41) 
814 :Indra, wielder of power and justice, ruler of the nation, Agni, enlightened sage and scholar, high priest and leading authority on the values of the system of governance, be firmly joined together in the cleanest programme of government in all decisions, actions and developmental plans and their completion for advancement, and know it well that this is the purpose of governance and the social order. You are two leading participants in this sacred yajna. Know this and abide in your position. (Rg. 8-38-1) 
815 :Ruling to the satisfaction of the people, going by chariot and reaching fast wherever needed, destroying the evils of darkness, ignorance, want and demonic injustice and exploitation, never frustrated or defeated but always victorious, Indra and Agni, ruler and enlightened sage and scholar, know this purpose well, follow and never relent. (Rg. 8-38-2) 
816 :Indra and Agni, ruler and enlightened leader, the people, leading lights and all, create these exhilarating honey sweets of soma with mountainous efforts to felicitate you. Know this, recognise it, and honour them. (Rg. 8-38-3) 
817 :and inspire the song of adoration in the depths of the heart and, pure, purifying, radiating and exalting, set in motion immense wealth of golden graces of universal love and desire for us. (Rg. 9-107-21) 
818 :Such as you are, 0 ruling soul, ten senses, ten pranas, ten subtle and gross modes of Prakrti and ten directions of space, all glorify you, mother source of all f I u ent stream s of w o rl d en erg i es sh i n i n g w i th th e zod i acs of the sun and all other brilliancies of nature and humanity. (Rg. 9-61-7) 
819 :wealth, knowledge and grace of culture, so that we, abundant and prosperous, may rejoice with them and live with them in happy homes in a state of honour and glory. (Rg. 1-30-13) 
820 :Lord of inviolable might, yourself your own definition, omniscient, instantly comprehending all that moves, you manifest your presence to the vision of your celebrants just as the one axle of two chariot wheels (moving, caring yet unmoved). (Rg. 1-30-14) 
821 :Lord of a hundred blissful acts of the yajna of creation, who by the prayers and pious actions of the celebrants come into their vision and experience like the axis of a wheel, you fulfill their love and desire wholly and entirely. (Rg. 1-30-15) 
822 :Just as the generous mother cow is milked for the person in need of nourishment, so every day for the sake of light and knowledge we invoke and worship Indra, lord omnipotent of light and life, maker of beautiful forms of existence and giver of protection and progress. (Rg. 1-4-1) 
823 :Indra, lord of light, protector of yajnic joy, promoter of sense and mind, come to our yajna, accept our homage of soma and give us the light and ecstasy of the soul. (Rg. 1-4-2) 
824 :Indra, lord of light and knowledge, come, so that we know you at the closest of those who are established in you and hold you in their heart and vision. Come, lord of life, come close, forsake us not. (Rg. 1-4-3) 
825 :Indra, lord of light and glory, ruler of the world, when you fill the earth and the environment with splendour like the dawn, the divine M other Nature raises you and manifests you as the great ruler of the great people of the world. The gracious mother elevates you in refulgence and majesty as the mighty Indra. (Indra at the cosmic level is the Lord Almighty; at the human level, the world ruler; and at the individual level, Indra is the soul, ruler of the body, senses, mind and intelligence.) (Rg. 10-134-1) 
826 :as an elephant driver wields the hook to control the strength and direction of the elephant, so you wield your power of far-reaching potential to control the world order, its forces and direction, and as the eternal ruler and controller holds the reins of time, so do you, 0 lord of might and magnanimity, hold the reins of the social order steps ahead of possibility long before actuality. The divine mother enlightens you, the gracious mother exalts you. (Rg. 10-134-6) 
827 :Strike down the adamantine stubbornness of the mortal enemy who wickedly injures the law and order of the system. Crush him down to naught who suppresses us and enslaves us. The divine mother create you, the gracious mother elevates you in glory as the great ruler. (Rg. 10-134-2) 
828 :You are the vibrant sage of sages, the visionary poet of poets, and the honey sweet of all tastes born of all food. You are the sole sustainer of all in bliss divine. (Rg. 9-18-2) 
829 :All divinities of nature and humanity in love and faith with you yearn to drink of the divine nectar and they are blest with it. You are the sole sustainer of all in bliss divine. (Rg. 9-18-3) 
830 :Sa sunve yo vasunam yo rayamaneta ya ida- nam. Somo yah suksitindm. That Soma which is the generator, harbinger and ruler guide of all forms of wealth, honour and excellence, lands, knowledge and awareness, and of happy homes isthus realised in its divine manifestation. (Rg. 9-108-13) 
831 :Soma is the omniscient and omnipotent divine spirit, whose ecstatic presence, our soul experiences, whose powers, ourvibrantforces experience and adore, by whose path and guidance our power and honour moves and moves forward, by whose grace we develop our pranic energies and our sense of love and judgement, and by whose word and grace we anoint and consecrate our ruler for our high level of defence and security. (Rg. 9-108-14) 
832 :H ol i I y i s Soma, bri 11 i ant presence of beauty, peace and power of divinity, protector of sages, ecstasy of life, realised in the essence, and, adorned by devotees as a darling presence, it is invoked and worshipped with creative acts of meditation by the celebrants. (Rg. 9-105-2) 
833 :Ay am daks ay a sadliano yam sardhaya v it aye. Ayam devebhyo madhumattarah sutah. T hi s i s the means to effi ci ency for perfecti on, thi s is for strength and success for fulfilment, and when it is realised, it is the sweetest, most honeyed experience for the divines. (Rg. 9-105-3) 
834 :Streams of Soma flows for us, brilliant, eloquent and expansive, friendly, inspiring, free from sin, intellectually creative and spiritually illuminative. (Rg. 9-101-10) 
835 :These Soma streams, nourishing, energising, illuminating, are bright and beatific as the dawn and, vibrant but unfluctuating, they abide constant in the heart. (Rg. 9-101-12) 
836 :operations of higher mind in the purified heart core, let the Soma streams, vibrant and vocal, bring us spiritual energy, intelligential illumination and divine awareness all round in the world. (Rg. 9-101-11) 
837 :Generous, refulgent Soma spirit of beauty, peace and glory, sanctify us by these streams of grace. I n the ocean depths of this honourable universe, energise and move all forms of wealth and peaceful settlements and consecrate us in the space divine. Spirit of the expansive universe, dynamic I ike the stormy winds, high-priest of cosmic yajna for all, bless us with a settled state of humanity in the vibrant system of a volatile world. (Rg. 9-97-52) 
838 :And by this sacred stream of divinity, cleanse and sanctify us in this holy lake of the divine Word worth hearing over and above what has been heard. M aster of infinite power and wealth, destroyer of hoards of negativities, give us boundless forms of wealth for our battle of life, shaking, as if, like a tree of ripe fruit this mighty tree of the world. (Rg. 9-97-53) 
839 :T hese are the mighty great and construed ve w orks of the virile and generous Soma in the battles of life either in social dynamics or close encounters or in fierce conflicts: sending the destroyers to sleep, separating off the unfriendly and removing the unawake and unaware from here where they are, (by constructive, waking up friendly exercise). (Rg. 9-97-54) 
840 :Agni, lord of light, fire of life, you are our closest friend and saviour. Be good and gracious, the very spirit and security of the home for the inmates. (Rg. 5-24-1) 
841 :Agni, you are the home and shelter of the world. Pure and purifier, you create and give the food for life and energy, wealth and honour. G i ve us the food, energy and light of life. Come and pervade this home as the very spirit and security. (Rg. 5-24-2) 
842 :Lord most pure and purifying, light of illumination, with all our friends, for sure, we pray to you for peace and life's well being. (Rg. 5-24-4) 
843 :Let us proceed, study and win our goals, successfully and peacefully, across these regions of the world, study and harness electric energy, and let all divine forces of nature and nobilities of humanity be Indra, the sun, the wind, electric energy of the firmament with all year's phases of the sun, supports, strengthens and promotes our yajna, our body's health and our people and future generations. (Rg. 10-157-2) 
844 :May Indra, ruling power of the world with all its natural and human forces, winds and stormy troops across the sun's rays and over the year, be the protector and promoter of our health of body and social organisations. (Rg. 10-157-3) 
845 :Prava (1) [Pra va indray a vrtrahantamaya vipraya gatham gay at a yain jujosate.] destroyer of evil, sin and darkness, sing and offer your songs of adoration which he loves, enjoys and happily accepts. M aruts, heroic devotees, chant devotional hymns and present the homage of worship and service to Indra who, youthful and renowned, sustains the world and responds to their devotion with joyous favour and spiritual elevation. Indra, omnipotent lord, living close to you in the honey sweet abode of your realm, may we augment our wealth and excellence and mediate on you divine presence. The brilliant poet, singing like an inspired fiery power divine, reveals the origin of nature's divinities and the rise of human brilliancies. Great is his commitment, inviolable his discipline, bonded ishewith purity as a brother, having chosen light of the sun and shower of clouds for his element, and he goes forward proclaiming the message of his vision by the paths of piety. (Rg. 9-97-7) 
846 :Like hansa birds of discriminative taste by instinct, judicious poets and scholars spontaneously come home to passion and ardour of thought and imagination free from fear and violence and, together in unison as a band of friends, generous and mighty of power and understanding, sing and celebrate the adorable, pure and purifying unforgettable Soma source of beauty, music and poetry. (Rg. 9-97-8) 
847 :That Soma source of beauty, music and poetry is ever dynamic spontaneously playing the sportive game. The power, force and velocity of that presence, the mind and senses do not comprehend. The spirit of ultimate penetrative and pervasive power reflects infinite possibilities, the beatific saviour manifests its omnipotence day and night. (Rg. 9-97-9) 
848 :The seekers of soma in search of food for body, mind and soul rush on like resounding charioteers and warriors of horse, and go forward for the achievement of life's wealth. (Rg. 9-10-1) 
849 :Dynamic are the seekers like heroes commanding superfast chariots laden with riches, holding controls in their hands, their shouts of victory rising like poet's songs of celebration. (Rg. 9-10-2) 
850 :Like kings celebrated by songs of praise, like yajna beautified by seven priests, the soma seekers are hallowed by songs of praise as soma is energised by sun-rays. (Rg. 9-10-3) 
851 :Streams of soma distilled and consecrated by the hallowed voice of the Veda flow round for the joy of mankind. (Rg. 9-10-4) 
852 :The brave and brilliant seekers of soma, light of divinity, having drunktheglory of the rising sun atdawn and themselves rising in glory, extend and spread the light of subtle knowledge around like light of the sun. (Rg. 9-10-5) 
853 :Veteran scholars and artists, blest with the flames and showers of the I ight and generosity of the omnificent lord of soma, open widethe doors of divine knowledge and will for all humanity over the world. (Rg. 9-10-6) 
854 :Seven priests in unison as brothers, happy and dedicated with peace at heart, sit on the vedi and fulfill the yajna in honour of one sole divinity for one sole purpose in the service of humanity and divinity. (Rg. 9-10-7) 
855 :I n the core of the heart we hold the yajna and the lord of yajna, our eye fixed on the sun with love and reverence, and thereby we distil the light and peace of existence, reflection of omniscient and creative divinity. (Rg. 9-10-8) 
856 :The brave visionary of soma creativity sees the dear heavenly light and the vision of the light giver, distilled, concentrated and treasured in the core of the heart by the performers of soma yajna. (Rg. 9-10-9) 
857 :Knowing the relevance of their vibrant action in Dharma, wise sages, brilliant and gracious, move by the path of rectitude following the eternal law of existence created by the lord of peace and glory. (Rg. 9-7-1) 
858 :Most adorable of the adorables, worthy of worship, Soma, lord of peace and joy, first and foremost of the honey streams of life, pervades the dynamics of existence in the eternal law. (Rg. 9-7-2) 
859 :First and foremost, generous and eternal lord of love, Soma free from violence, proclaims the words of truth relevant to yajnic life and calls up the yajakas to the hall of yajna in peace and bliss. (Rg. 9-7-3) 
860 :When the poetic spirit of omniscience wrapped in glory moves and inspires the vision and imagination of the poet, the creative spirit flies to the heavens and celebrates divinity in poetry. (Rg. 9-7-4) 
861 :The pure and purifying Soma rises over all rivals and sits on top of people like a ruler when the wise sages pray and move his attention and love. (Rg. 9-7-5) 
862 :Over the regions of light, dear, loved and destroyer of suffering, Soma, Spirit of purity and energy, resides in the heart of happy celebrants and, eloquent and inspiring, illuminates and beatifies their heart and intellect. (Rg. 9-7-6) 
863 :H e who happily abides by the laws of this Soma, spirit of vibrant purity, goes forward in life with powers of ruling strength and excellence and sagely people of noble knowledge and unfailing action. (Rg. 9-7-7) 
864 :T hose w i se sages of know I edge, w hose sw eet w i 11 and loving emotions abide by divine love and friendship, freedom and justice, and excellenceand generosity, live happy and prosperous in a state of vibrancy like waves of sparkling streams, by the love and exhilaration of Soma, spirit of peace and purity. (Rg. 9-7-8) 
865 :M ay heaven and earth lead us to acquisition of wealth, sweet homes, honour, excellence and fame for winning the higher victories of life. (Rg. 9-7-9) 
866 :Today here and now, we choose for ourselves and pray for your power, peace and bliss, light and firewhich is universally loved, all protective, promotive and all sanctifying. (Rg. 9-65-28) 
867 :We pray for your gift of peace, power and sanctity, delightfully adorable, worthy of choice, stimulating and energising, enlightening, protecting and promoting, universally loved and valued. We pray, let it flow and purify us. (Rg. 9-65-29) 
868 :The divinities of nature and humanity light the sacred fire: supreme light of heaven, vital fire of life of the earth, Vaishvanara, Ieader and energiser of the world, born of cosmic law and the fire of cosmic yajna. It is the visionary, even the revolutionary, poet, ruler of the world, sacred as a chance visitor, voice of the people, sustainer of life and its order. (Rg. 6-7-1) 
869 :you as a baby and celebrate you all round likethe rising sun at dawn, or like a young scholar emerging from the home of his parents and teachers like the sun from heaven over the earth. By virtue of your holy acts, the mortals achieve the immortality of holiness and excellence. (Rg. 6-7-4) 
870 :Divines and brilliant people light and sing in praise of Vaishvanara, sacred fire of the world, centre- hold of yajna and creative programmes of development, treasure source of wealths, divine challenge and cherished deity of their service, motive power of nonviolent projects, the real symbol and the very life of yajna. (Rg. 6-7-2) 
871 :Sing in holy words in honour and praise of M itra and Varuna, ruling lord of light and dispenser of justice, who hold and sustain the great world order and maintain the universal values of eternal Truth and Law for you. (Rg. 5-68-1) 
872 :M itra and Varuna, both brilliant rulers of nature and humanity, sources of the showers of fertility, prosperity and felicity, are eminent and adorable, honoured among the brilliancies of nature and humanity. (Rg. 5-68-2) 
873 :Great is your power and potential for us over the wealth and excellence of heavenly and earthly values, culture and conduct and behaviour. Great is your rule and order over the divinities of nature and humanity. (Rg. 5-68-3) 
874 :Indra, Lord Supreme of wondrous light and power, come and bless us. All these sacred objects in existence, created, energised and extended over spaces from the subtlest causes by you are sustained in your divine power. (Rg. 1-3-4) 
875 :Indra, Lord Supreme of light and life, meditated by the pure at heart, realised by the enlightened, distilled from the Veda and the world of existence by the visionaries, come and inspire the chant of the dedicated yajakas. (Rg. 1-3-5) 
876 :Indra, lord and breath of life, energy and speech, come fast at the speed of light, vitalise our songs of praise in yajna and bless us with food for the body, mind and soul. (Rg. 1-3-6) 
877 :W hoever the mortal that honours and adores the favour and grace of I ndra when the fire is burning for the sake of excellence, the waters of his life and the flow of his actions would be blest with fulfilment. (Rg. 6- 60-11) 
878 :M ay the two, Indra and A gni, electricity and fire, give us food and sustenance full of energy and excellence and provide us with modes of travel and transport. Let us too develop the fire and electricity, energy for transport and communication. (Rg. 6-60-12) 
879 :Indu, Soma, light of life and divine ecstasy, goes forward to the sacred heart of the devotee and, like a friend of friends, destroys contradictions, confirms complementarities and advances human growth. Thus, just as youthful mortals go with their lady love, join and protect them, and live a full life with vows kept within the bounds of discretion and the law, so does Soma in the sacred heart inspire the loved soul as a friend in covenant by a hundred paths of human possibilities of growth and advancement within the bounds of D harma. The L ord does not break the promise ever. (Rg. 9-86-16) 
880 :No one can equal merely by action, much less hurt even by yaj nas, that person who has won the favour and grace of Indra, lord divine who is rising as well as raising his devotees high, who is universally adored, universal genius, redoubtable and invincibly illustrious by his own essential power. (Rg. 8-70-3) 
881 :Unchallengeable, awful, victorious in cosmic dynamics, in whose pervasive presence great and tempestuous stars and planets, earths and heavens, all in unison move in order and do homage in reverence, such is Indra. (Rg. 8-70-4) 
882 :Sakhaya a ni sidata punanaya pra gayata. Sisurh na yajhaih pari bhusata sriye. Come friends, sit on the yajna vedi, sing and celebrate Soma, pure and purifying spirit of life, and with yajna exalt him like an adorable power for the grace and glory of life. (Rg. 9-104-1) 
883 :As mothers love, adore and adorn a child with beauty and ornaments, so energise and exalt Soma as versatile beauty and grace of life, protector of divinities, source of ecstasy and doubly strong both physically and spiritually. (Rg. 9-104-2) 
884 :Realise and exalt Soma in the essential purity of its nature, power and presence as the very foundation of perfection and achievement in life, so that it may be the surest and most peaceful base of strength, power and fulfilment for the spirit of love and friendship as The mighty Soma spirit of divinity realised and exalted by the celebrant, streaming in a thousand showers, reaches and sanctifies the pure, protected and sanctified heart of its cherished devotee. (Rg.9-109-16) 
885 :M ay that victor spirit of Soma divinity of infinite power, realised with meditative Karma and crystallized by perception and awareness, manifest in the heart and bless us. (Rg. 9-109-17) 
886 :mind and intelligence of the yogis, come and abide in the heart core of the soul. (Rg. 9-109-18) 
887 :it fTwifi: MJjcjP h it arcrfcrirr ttF^t i ^ ? \ W hatever gifts of power and peace for humanity are created in the farthest nature or in this world of existence or in that unknown transcendent source of all that is in existence, all that, 0 Soma, lord of supreme power and unfathomable peace, bear and bring for us and our future generations. (Rg. 9-65-22) 
888 :W hatever powers of peace and energy are created and distilled in active forces, in holy acts, in the homes or among all five peoples of humanity, we pray, may flow and sanctify us. (Rg. 9-65-23) 
889 :M ay the divinities of nature and humanity, pure, vibrant and blissful, activated, seasoned and cultured anywhere, bring us showers of power, virility and creativity from the lights of heaven and energise and sanctify us. (Rg. 9-65-24) 
890 :The dear dedicated sage adores you and with words of love and faith prays for your attention from the highest heaven of light. (Rg. 8-11-7) 
891 :You are the universal eye watching the entire humanity of the world as master and ruler. As such, 0 lord, we invoke and call upon you in our battles of life. (Rg. 8-11-8) 
892 :We, seekers of strength and fighters for victory, invoke and adore A gni, omnipotent power of wondrous munificence and achievement, for protection, defence and advancement in our struggles and contests of life. (Rg. 8-11-9) 
893 :Indra, lord of vision and hero of a hundred great actions, bring us abundant and illustrious strength, courage and procreative energy by which we may fight out and win many battles of our life. (Rg. 8-98-10) 
894 :Indra, 0 lord of light and power, mysterious and sublime, refulgent ruler of the clouds and mountains, omniscient dispenser of munificence, whatever the rain of blessings not yet showered by you, whatever the wealth and honour of success not yet ours, pray give us with both hands. (Rg. 5-39-1) 
895 :Indra, whatever you think is worthy of choice, bear and bring that brilliant gift of heavenly quality. Let us receive that and let us know that as a blessing of your unbounded generosity worthy to be received and justified with gratitude. (Rg. 5-39-2) 
896 :Adriva, wielder of thunder arms and ruler of clouds and mountains, with that mind and courage of yours which is great, renowned and magnanimous leading to sure success, break down the strongholds of darkness and scatter the forces of negativity to reveal the light of rectitude for success and victory.(Rg.5-39-3) 
897 :Dedicated celebrants perceive the presence beatific, manifested and expansive in the experience of nature around, cleanse it like a new born baby, discover and distil it in the spirit and adore it in song. As winds in storm raise a spark to blazing fire, bands of admirers celebrateitin its native glory. Omnipresent all-watching sagely divine, exalted to its omniscience and omnipotence in human consciousness by the music of the poetic voice, Soma, divine presence, radiates into the pure human heart loud and bold and transcends the soul to infinite space. (Rg. 9-96-17) 
898 :and poetic creator, maker of poets, exalted by sages, shower streams of bliss, adored a thousand ways for infinite power and glory, ultimate love and desire of poets, awful refulgence radiating to the third blazing space beyond the earthly and paradisal regions of life, the presence that rules and illuminates the heart and soul beyond the state of existential involvement, the one loving, blessing, beatific ultimate object of adoration and worship. (Rg. 9-96-18) 
899 :Pervading every form of life and nature, adorable supreme Soma presence of divinity, abiding with stars and planets in motion, bearing infinite powers, vibrating with the waves of nature's dynamics, vesting the cosmic structure, transcends to the fourth state of absolute bliss. Only the mighty sage speaks of the presence beyond speech. (Rg. 9-96-19) 
900 :These soma streams of life flow free and fulfil the cherished desires of humanity and exalt the creative splendour of the soul. (Rg. 9-8-1) 
901 :The same soma streams of life distilled from nature, contained in deep reservoirs, vibrating in human veins and nerves, marshalling in social forces energise and motivate the vibrant scholar and the pursuers of jnana-yoga and karma-yoga in knowledge and action. May they bring us the lustre and vitality of creative splendour and graces of culture, sanctifying as they are.(Rg.9-8-2) 
902 :for winning the ultimate success and victory of life. (Rg. 9-8-3) 
903 :Soma, lord of peace and purity, destroyer of suffering, manifests in refulgent forms of existence and pervades all round in stars and planets of the universe. (Rg. 9-8-6) 
904 :Lord of peace and bliss, come and purify the devotees, men of wealth, power and honour, and ward off all our negativities, oppositions, jealousies and enmities from us and bless us all to live together as friends. (Rg. 9-8-7) 
905 :All-watching guardian of humanity, omniscient lord of bliss, adored and self-realised by the soul of humanity, we pray for the gift of food and energy, light and knowledge, and all round happiness for all people of the world, your children. (Rg. 9-8-9) 
906 :Soma, beauty, joy, power and divinity of life, pure, and purifying, vibrates every where and flows free in a thousand streams, inspiring, energising and protecting, it is released and sanctified by Vayu, cosmic energy and empowered by Indra, divine omnipotence, distilled by vibrant sages, received by creative humanity and spread abroad by ruling powers. (Rg. 9-13-1) 
907 :The Soma streams of life's felicity flow in a thousand ways of energy, power and divine inspiration, doing honour to the lord of glory and bliss, refining and purifying us for favour of the divinities and for winning victories of honour and excellence in life. (Rg. 9-13-3) 
908 :The showers of soma, blessings of the lord of peace and protection, like fastest forces electrified to omnipresence by urgent masters, reach to places and people that need light and protection against ignorance and darkness. (Rg. 9-13-6) 
909 :May those streams of soma, divine showers of beauty and glory, inspiring us, energising us with strength and virility, flow and purify us, and give us a thousand-fold wealth, honour and glory, and high creative potential for further advancement.(Rg.9-13-5) 
910 :Loving showers of divine light, peace and protection flow to the supplicants as mothers' milk to the child and are held by the dedicated in love and faith. (Rg. 9-13-7) 
911 :Let the pure and purifying showers of soma in divine flow, dedicated to omnipotence and to humanity in love roar as a cloud of rain showers, and, 0 roaring showers, throw out all jealousies and enmities of the world far away from us. (Rg. 9-13-8) 
912 :truth and rectitude in the yajnic hall of humanity. (Rg. 9-13-9) 
913 :Showers and streams of soma, most inspiring honey sweets of beauty and bliss of the world of divinity created in the house of the cosmic flow of existence and distilled in holy action ontheyajnavedi, arecreated for the soul in the state of excellence. (Rg. 9-12-1) 
914 :J ust as mother cows low for the calf so do the sages invoke and glorify Indra, lord of soma, beauty, joy and excellence, so that the lord may bless them with his presence and be happy with their songs of love and adoration. (Rg. 9-12-2) 
915 :The joyous waves abide by the sea, the saintly joy of the wise abides in the Vedic voice, and the soma joy that is exuberant in divine ecstasy abides in the hall of yajna. (Rg. 9-12-3) 
916 :Soma, lord of eternal bliss, omnipotent creator of the noble universe, omniscient visionary, centre of the universe of heavenly beauty, all watching, who transcends the best and highest, is the adorable love of all. (Rg. 9-12-4) 
917 :The brilliant, the wise, seek and abide by Soma, joyous lord of the universe, who reflects in all forms of existence and abides in the holy cave of the heart. (Rg. 9-12-5) 
918 :Soma, self-refulgent lord of bliss who pervades unto the bounds of space, augments the treasure-hold of the honey sweets of nature, inspires the holy minds, and the voice of divinity overflows in poetry and ecstasy. (Rg. 9-12-6) 
919 :Soma eternally sung in hymns of adoration, creator, protector and sustainer of nature, indwelling i nspi rer of mi nd, i ntel I i gence and wi 11, giver of the nectar of nourishment and joy, inspires and fulfils the couples and communities of humanity as a friend and companion. (Rg. 9-12-7) 
920 :Soma, divine poet creator, all peace and bliss, abiding in the heavenly beauty of the universe, inspiring and energising human creativity especially of the wise sage, sends down streams of joy in song overflowing the poetic imagination. (Rg. 9-12-8) 
921 :Higher and higher rise and roll your powers, purities and forces, roaring like waves of the sea. Keep upthemotion of thewheel of life, lettheswell of music rise on with the chant going on. (Rg. 9-50-1) 
922 :When you rise and reach the pinnacle of yajna which deserves to be protected and promoted, then as you risein intensity, the priests' chant of the three voices of Rks, Samans and Yajus also swells to the climax. (Rg. 9-50-2) 
923 :The devotees, who are seekers of your protection for advancement in their heart of hearts, intensify their awareness through relentless concentration and meditate on your presence dearer than dearest, eliminator of negative fluctuations of mind, pure and purifying spirit of divinity replete with honey sweets of ecstasy. (Rg. 9-50-3) 
924 :Flow in and purify, 0 poetic visionary and most exhilarating Spirit of ecstasy, the sacred heart of the celebrant in streams of beauty, light and sweetness to join the celebrant at the centre of hisfaith and devotion. (Rg. 9-50-4) 
925 :Flow on, most exhilarating Spirit, adored and exalted by concentrative mind and senses of the seeker in meditation, flow on for ecstatic experience of the soul. (Rg. 9-50-5) 
926 :Go on thus always advancing for the people dedicated to positive good work in thought, policy and action, accelerating, controlling and balancing theforces of peace, progress and restless ambition. (Rg. 9-61-2) 
927 :A nd for us, let abundant streams of food, energy and wealth of a thousandfold riches and variety flow abounding in horses, transport and progress, lands, cows and beauties of culture and literature, gold and golden graces. 0 creator, ruler and controller of peace and joy, you know the values and dynamics of evolution and progress. (Rg. 9-61-3) 
928 :D estroy i n g th e d estroy ers, el i m i n ati n g th e sel f i sh, ungenerous hoarders and parasites, Soma, divine creativity in nature and humanity attains to its yajnic end and aim in the existential order created by omnipotent Indra. (Rg. 9-61-25) 
929 :Maho no ray a a bhara pavamana jahi mrdhah. Rasvendo viravad yasah. Lord Supreme of beauty, splendour and grace, pure and purifying, ever awake, bring us wealth of the highest order, eliminate the destructive adversaries and bless uswith honour, excellence and fame, and continue the human family with noble and brave generations. (Rg. 9-61-26) 
930 :Lord of peace and purity, purifier and saviour of the celebrants, when you please to bless the devotee with prosperity and fulfilment in life's yajna, not a hundred adversaries can stop or frustrate you. (Rg. 9-61-27) 
931 :Lord of the universe, by the energy with which you give light to the sun, by the same light and energy inspire the will and actions of humanity and purify us. (Rg. 9-63-7) 
932 :The light of the world, pure, radiant and inspiring over man and mind, joins the man of super fast intelligence and inspires him to rise and fly over paths of the skies. (Rg. 9-63-8) 
933 :And the man of brilliance and superfast intelligence, yoking ten motive forces to go over paths of the skies exclaims: "Indra is great, kind and gracious!" and he flies over the paths of his holy choice. (Rg. 9-63-9) 
934 :exulting in grass, it rises from its source and moves like velocity itself, splitting, protecting, accomplishing. C urrents of wind and energy folIow the rise of its power. 0 fiery energy, attraction and repulsion, that's your path of motion. (Rg. 7-3-2) 
935 :Agni, abundant energy divine, as your flames arise, new and undecaying, the radiant waves traverse the heights of heaven in space, and thus you move like a messenger to the divinities of nature at the one end and to the brilliant scholars at the other. (Rg. 7-3-3) 
936 :That Indra, dynamic and enlightened mind and intelligence, we cultivate and strengthen for the elimination of the great waste, deep ignorance and suffering prevailing in the world. May that light and mind be exuberant and generous for us with showers of Indrah sa damane krta ojisthah sa bale hitah. Dyumrii slokl sa somyah. Indra, mind and intelligence, was created for enlightenment and for giving enlightenment. Most lustrous and powerful, it is engaged in the creation of joy and strength. It is rich in the wealth of knowledge, praise-worthy, and cool, gentle and at peace in the state of enlightenment. (Rg. 8-93-8) 
937 :Held in and by the voice of divinity liketheroar of thunder and the flood of sun-rays, it is powerful, unfallen, irrepressible and lofty with thought, so let it express itself freely. (Rg. 8-93-9) 
938 :Then, 0 Soma, Spirit of divinity, the noblest, most vibrant generous and brilliant souls have a drink of the el ixir of your honey sweet presencefIowing exuberantly at the purest. (Rg. 9-51-3) 
939 :Divah ply us am uttamam somam indr ay a vajrine. Sunota madhumattamam. Create the highest honey sweet Soma of divine consciousness, highest exhilarating experience of the light of heaven for the soul's awareness, and then rise to adamantine power against all possi ble violations. (Rg. 9-51-2) 
940 :Soma, joyous spirit of the universe, sustainer of the regions of light, constant doer, eternal delight and bliss of divinities, perfect omnipotent power, sole worthy of worship by humanity vibrates omnipresent, purifies and sanctifies the life of existence. Destroyer of want and suffering, ever creative, with its own powers spontaneously, like energy itself creates movement and growth in the channels of existence. (Rg. 9-76-1) 
941 :Wielding the powers and instrumentalities of nature, like a warrior and victor in immanent will and omniscience, keen to share the joy of existence with humanity in paths of daily business, commanding the chariot of the universe in micro and macro systems of its dynamics, inspiring and elevating the soul's potential, itself stimulated and energised into manifestation by thinkers and men of yajnic action in meditation, the spirit of universal light and glory is aroused to raise and bless humanity. (Rg. 9-76-2) 
942 :Soma, vigorous spirit of joyous power and generosity, pure, purifying and constantly flowing, brilliant, blazing and advancing in strength, come by the stream and waves of energy and enter in the heart core of the soul. As thunder, lightning and clouds of rain shower and augment heaven and earth, pray strengthen us, and with divine intelligence, as it were, extend our food, energies, progress and victories for all ti me. Y ou are the creator, you are the maker, you are the giver. (Rg. 9-76-3) 
943 :Indra, illustrious lord of the world, ruler and commander of human forces, karmayogi, when you are invoked by people anywhere east or west, north or south, up or down, then, 0 lord of excellence, you feel highly impelled by those many and come and act as the destroyer of many evi I s for the peopl e of reverence and exceptional strength. (Rg. 8-4-1) 
944 :A nd since, 0 lord I ndra, you go to the celebrants, illustrious, child-like innocent and the humble and kind alike, sitwith them, socialise and enjoy, so thededicated admirers and learned men of vision and wisdom offer homage and reverence, exalt you with sacred hymns and say : Come, 0 lord, and accept our tributes and homage. (Rg. 8-4-2) 
945 :M ay Indra, lord omnipotent, master of theworld's wealth and power, directly listen to our joint prayer for worldly and spiritual advancement with attentive ear and sympathetic understanding, and may the lord of supreme power come to protect and promote our yajnic programme and prayer and taste the pi easure of success. (Rg. 8-61-1) 
946 :Tam hi svardjam vrsabham tamojasa dhisane nistataksatuh. Utopamanam prathamo ni sldasi somakamam hi te manah. That self-ruled, self-refulgent, brave and generous human character and programme, that human republic, the heaven and earth vested with divine will and intelligence conceive, create and fashion forth for self-realisation of innate glory. 0 man, among similars and comparables, you stand the first and highest, and your mind is dedicated to the love of soma, peace, pleasure and excellence of life. (Rg. 8-61-2) 
947 :Soma, pure and purifying omnificent lord, you grant ample and praise-worthy wealth, honour and excellence to the devotees. Pray, let your dear and blissful presence arise in the ocean-like time and space of human existence, inspire the depth of the heart and save the supplicant. (Rg. 9-63-23) 
948 :vibrate in existence destroying sin and evil. Pray impel the impious people to truth, piety and creative generosity, or punish and eliminate them like hurdles in the creative paths of piety and rectitude. (Rg. 9-63-24) 
949 :Indu, divine spirit of peace, power, beauty and grace, move and bless us to achieve wealth, honour and excellence of high order, universally loved and valued, a thousandfold sustaining, mighty powerful, all challenging and finally victorious. (Rg. 9-98-1) 
950 :your treasure of food, energy, and knowledge and to your divine peace and comfort. (Rg. 9-98-5) 
951 :M ay that I ndu, divine Spirit of peace, purity and beauty, inspiring and strengthening, overflowing with the power of ecstasy, flow and reach into the favoured heart of the devotee, that supreme shower of divinity which goesforward like radiations of light into theyajna of love and non-violence with love and desire to reveal the truth of life. (Rg. 9-98-3) 
952 :Flow forth and consecrate, 0 Soma presence of divinity, as great ocean of life, father, generator and sustainer of divinities and ultimate haven and home of all the worlds of existence. (Rg. 9-109-4) 
953 :Sukrah pavasva devebhyah soma dive prthivyai sam ca prajabhyah. You are the sustainer of the heavenly regions of light, most blissful presence for experience in the yajna of truth and divine law, and the ultimate winner of the victory. Flow forth, divine Soma, purify and consecrate us in the presence. (Rg. 9-109-6) 
954 :I sing and celebrate the glories of Agni, lord omniscient, light and leader of the world, dearest and most welcome as an enlightened guest, loving as a friend, who like a divine harbinger, reveals the light of knowledge to us. (Rg. 8-84-1) 
955 :I adore Agni whom the divinities established among mortals as the visionary poet and the spirit of enlightenment and awareness, as intelligence and mind, as will and passion, as perception and volition, as male and femal e and as the yaj na f i re and the vital heat of the body system, the two ways in which divine vitality expresses itself. (Rg. 8-84-2) 
956 :listen to their voices of prayer and, by all your will and power, protect and promote the children and grand children of humanity. (Rg. 8-84-3) 
957 :Indra, come, take us over as your own. Dear and giver of fulfilment you are, all dominant by nature, character and action, inconceivably open and bright, expansive and unbounded all round like a cloud of vapour, lord and master of the light of heaven. (Rg. 8-98-4) 
958 :Lord eternal and ever true, lover, protector and promoter of the beauty and joy of existence, you are higher and greater than both heaven and earth. Indra, omnipotent lord and master of the light of heaven, you are the i nspi rer and giver of advancement to the pursuer of the knowledge, beauty and power of the soma reality of life. (Rg. 8-98-5) 
959 :Indra, you are catalyser, breaker and maker, and sustainer of the eternal forms of existence in cosmic dynamics, destroyer of the destroyer and promoter of thoughtful people. You are the guardian of the light of life, sustainer of the heavens of joy. (Rg. 8-98-6) 
960 :Breaker of the enemy forts, youthful, creative and imaginative, hero of boundless strength, sustainer of the acts of the world and disposer, wielder of the thunderbolt, universally acclaimed and celebrated is risen into prominence. (Rg. 1-11-4) 
961 :Indra, blazing as the sun, wielder of the clouds, you break open the water-hold of theclouds.Thedevas, planets, fearless seekers of the lord of light and centre- home, moved round in orbit, hold on to their place in the solar family. (Rg. 1-11-5) 
962 :All the hymns of praise celebrate Indra, lord ruler over the universe with His power and splendour. Thousands, uncountable, are His gifts and benedictions, infinitely more indeed. (Rg. 1-11-8) 
963 :Soma, prime cause of the world and laws of existence, unfathomable as ocean, taking on by itself countless causes of existence in the vast vault of space and time, roaring and generating the evolving stars, planets and forms of life, is the ruling power of the universe. Potent and generous, infinite, creative and generative, refulgent Soma pervades the immaculate, sacred and protective universe and on top of it expands it and transcends. (Rg. 9-97-40) 
964 :Matsi vaywn istaye radhase no matsi mitra varuna puyamanah. Matsi sardho marutam matsi devan matsi dyavaprthivi deva soma. its windy fulfilment and accomplishment of the purpose of creative evolution and, purifying and sanctifying as you are, you energise and fulfil the centripetal and centrifugal modes of energy. You energise the sense of courage, boldness and even defiance of stormy energy, you energise the senses, mind and intelligence, and you energise and fulfil the heaven, earth and the skies of space. (Rg. 9-97-42) 
965 :Soma, potent absol ute, generated the M ahat mode of Prakrti, Mother Nature, which is the womb of all elements, energies and forms of existence and which comprehends all perceptive, intelIigential and psychic powers as well. And then the creative-generative lord of evolutionary action, Soma, vested lustre and energy in Indra, the soul, and, lord of light as it is, Soma vested light in the sun. (Rg. 9-97-41) 
966 :immortal, expands to regions of the universe I ike soaring energy and pervades there as an immanent presence.(Rg.9-3-1) 
967 :This spirit, divine, generous and refulgent, adored and exalted by sages and scholars, and holding jewel gifts of life for people of generous charity, watches and controls the actions of humanity and the laws of nature in operation. (Rg. 9-3-6) 
968 :This divine spirit, pure, purifying and powerful, advancing by its own essential power as a hero, brings and distributes cherished gifts of life among the celebrants. (Rg. 9-3-4) 
969 :This spirit of divinity going forward I ike a chariot, pure, purifying, gives the gifts of life and reveals new and latest words of advance knowledge as it moves on. (Rg. 9-3-5) 
970 :This refulgent spirit, light of life, saviour and harbinger of joy, glorified by celebrants and poets of rectitude is praised and adored for the achievement of victory and advancement. (Rg. 9-3-3) 
971 :This refulgent spirit is celebrated by sages and, being undaunted, overtakes all crookedness, purifying and sanctifying everything and every mind. (Rg. 9-3-2) 
972 :This spirit with the waves of its power rushes and radiates unto the heavens across the skies and atomic oceans of space, pure, purifying and roaring likethunder. (Rg. 9-3-7) 
973 :This spirit radiates to the heavens across the atomic oceans of skies and spaces, unhurt and unopposed, pure, purifying, performing the cosmic yajna of love, non-violence and creation of new life in evolution. This divine spirit since its timeless manifestation, revealed and manifested for the divines, arises in the pure hearts of humanity, eliminating pain and suffering. (Rg. 9-3-9) 
974 :This spirit of divinity, power of infinite law and action, creating and providing food, energy and sustenance for life, flows on in continuum, self- sustained, self-revealed, discovered, self-realised. (Rg. 9-3-10) 
975 :ThisSoma, spiritof peaceandjoy, brave dispel I er of darkness, moves with the subtlest intelligence and awareness and comes by the fastest media of psychic communication and comes to the seat of its presence in the mind and soul of man. (Rg. 9-15-1) 
976 :This infinite and eternal Spiritof peace, love and joy is ever keen to bless humanity with boundless piety and divinity in which men of immortal knowledge, karma and divine love abide. (Rg. 9-15-2) 
977 :People adore this glorious power closely treasured in the heart, the divine power that creates and gives great food, energy and advancement.(Rg.9-15-7) 
978 :This divine Spirit is attained and internalised in the core of the heart and soul by the brilliant path of clairvoyance, when the passionate seekers surrender themselves in obedience to it. (Rg. 9-15-3) 
979 :light and wide creative forces, ruling over the dynamics of the vibrating oceans of space. (Rg. 9-15-5) 
980 :This Soul, vibrating on top of the highest bounds of the universe, abides in repose in the world of existence, one with all in the multitudinous world, generous and vi ri Ie, beari ng and rul i ng the enti re wealth and powers of the universe by its power and splendour. (Rg. 9-15-4) 
981 :It moves and overcomes hard and rough places of hidden hoarded wealth of negative powers and goes over to protect the powers that observe di vi ne disci pi i ne in the battles of life. (Rg. 9-15-6) 
982 :Ten pranas and ten faculties, of senses and mind, glorify this Soma, lord of peace and joy, who is most ecstatically blissful and wields noble powers of protection for advancement and progress. (Rg. 9-15-8) 
983 :This Soma spirit of joy in existence, mighty generous, all protective omnipresent mover, extremely charming, creating and giving thousandfolds of wealth, honour and excellence, vibrates by its dynamic presence at the highest and brightest in the heart of choice souls and in choice beauties of existence. (Rg. 9-38-1) 
984 :This Spirit of joy, eliminator of suffering, happy voices of the sage past three bondages of body, mind and soul adore, with the intensity of adamantine meditation for the spiritual joy of general humanity. (Rg. 9-38-2) 
985 :This Soma pervades and shines in the generality of humanity like the eagle among birds, victorious conqueror of the skies, shining and radiating like the moon, lover and admirer of its darling, the lovely night. (Rg. 9-38-4) 
986 :This ecstatic bliss, honey sweet of life's joy, appears like the rising sun at dawn when, as the beauty and glory of existence, it reflects in the heart of the chosen soul. (Rg. 9-38-5) 
987 :This Soma spirit of Ananda, self-manifestive, self-proclaiming, all wielder and sustainer, reflects in and radiates from its darling mother form, the green and golden veil of Nature, roars with thunder and rolls around for the joyous experience of humanity, aliminating pain and sufferance. (Rg. 9-38-6) 
988 :This Soma, ten senses and ten pranas of the devotee, well controlled past sufferance and pointed to concentrative meditation, present in uninvolved purity of form, by which experience the bright presence is glorified for the soul's joy. (Rg. 9-38-3) 
989 :This supreme all potent soma light and joy of the universe is realised by earnest sages within. It is all aware over the universe, master controller of the universal mind energy, ail saviour and protector, and without delay it rises and manifests in the inner self of its favourite blessed devotee. (Rg. 9-28-1) 
990 :This Soma, divine presence and bliss, emerges and vibrates in holy minds, distilled by them through meditation for the noble souls while it rolls in majesty in and over all regions of the universe. (Rg. 9-28-2) 
991 :This self-refulgent, immortal divine presence, highest lover of noble and generous souls, pervades and shines all over in the universe through its mode of Prakrti, dispelling darkness and eliminating evil. (Rg. 9-28-3) 
992 :This omnificent shower of generous divinity vibrating by the dynamics of Prakrti and her tenfold mode of subtle and gross elements proclaims its presence loud and bold in beauteous forms of mutations and manifestations of nature in the universe. (Rg. 9-28-4) 
993 :This soma illuminates the sun in heaven, pure, purifying and dynamic, joy in the beauty of purity, the very spirit of joy itself. (Rg. 9-28-5) 
994 :It rises and abides with the sun on top of the regions of light and, internalised in the pure mind and clairvoyant consciousness, it is the divine ecstasy of the celebrant. (Rg. 9-27-5) 
995 :This Soma, creative, inspiring and poetic spirit of universal joy, pure and sanctifying, manifests in the pure and pious consciousness of the devotees, eliminating disturbing negativities when it is contemplated with This all potent and versatile divine spirit of universal joy manifests in the pure consciousness of the karma-yogi and wins the light of heaven for the vibrant meditative soul. (Rg. 9-27-2) 
996 :This Soma, joyous spirit of divinity, isthesummit of heaven, infinitely generous, self-existent and omniscient, and with meditation, the ecstasy of it is collected in abundance in the consciousness by the dedicated sages. (Rg. 9-27-3) 
997 :give, speaking loud and bold its own eternal Word, it is pure and purifier, it loves the golden beauty and prosperity of life and loves to bless, it is soothing and self-refulgent beautiful, conqueror of all battles of cosmic dynamics, and eternally invincible.(Rg.9-27-4) 
998 :This Soma Spirit of eternal joy is omnipotent, all pervasive in space, infinitely generous, eliminator of suffering, and, purifying and sanctifying the human soul, it is the ultimate bliss of existence. (Rg. 9-27-6) 
999 :This mighty undauntable Soma, pure and purifyi ng, pervades and rol Is i n the universe everywhere, protector and promoter of the good and destroyer of si n and scandal. (Rg. 9-28-6) 
1000 :Soma, supremely generous Spirit of existence, self-revealed, self-realised by the devotee, lover or divine souls, manifests and vibrates in the pure heart of the devotee, eliminating negativities, sin and evil, for the pleasure and ecstasy of the celebrant. (Rg. 9-37-1) 
1001 :Soma, all watching omniscient, destroyer of suffering, omnipotent wielder and sustainer of the universe, pervades and vibrates in Prakrti, proclaiming its presence loud and bold as thunder. (Rg. 9-37-2) 
1002 :This dynamic omnipotent Spirit, light of heaven, pure and purifying, vibrates universally and rushes to the chosen imperishable soul of the devotee, destroying negativities, sin and evil. (Rg. 9-37-3) 
1003 :Soma, pure, purifying, and all pervasive across and ever on top of the three worlds of space and three dimensions of time, shines with the sun and other kindred luminaries. (Rg. 9-37-4) 
1004 :Soma, destroyer of darkness, generous, self- manifestive, self-revealed and self discovered, lord giver of thebestof wealth and excellenceof theworld, fearless and undaunted, pervades and vibrates in existence as Shakti, divine omnipotent energy.(Rg. 9-37-5) 
1005 :Self-refulgent generous Soma divine, celebrated by poets, rushes to manifest, brilliant, blissful and great, Whoever studies the sanctifying Rks, nectar preserved by the sages, he tastes the food seasoned and sanctified by the life breath of divinity. (Rg. 9-67-31) 
1006 :Whoever studies the Rks, sanctifying nectar preserved by the sages, for him, mother Sarasvati, omniscient divinity, herself distils and offers the milk, butter, honey and the nectar essence of life.(Rg.9-67-32) 
1007 :Flowing, sanctifying, edifying, fructifying and ecstatic is the holy experience of divine vision and message of the Rks received and collected by sagely seers and that is the eternal nectar preserved among the dedicated Brahmanas. Divine, vibrant, flowing and sanctifying verses received and preserved by divine sages may, we pray, beautify this world of ours and also that other beyond and fulfill our will and purpose of Purushartha, active living here and the freedom of N ihshreyas, M oksha in the next. sages for all time purify and sanctify themselves, by that very sacred thousand streamed shower of celestial light of divinity may the Vedic verses purify and elevate us. Purifying, sanctifying and beautifying are the sacred Vedic verses of divinity by which the soul attains to ultimate freedom and anandaof M okhsa. By the same it enjoys the pure holy pleasures of life as its rightful share and ultimately attains immortal freedom from the bondage of life and death. With profound homage and reverence, let us move and rise to the most youthful Agni, light, fire and electrical energy, which shines well kindled in its own region, is wondrously bright and forceful between the vast heaven and earth, and when it is well invoked it moves in all directions for all. (Rg. 7-12-1) 
1008 :Sa mahna visva duritani sahvan agni stave dama a jdtaveddh. Sa no raksisad duritad avadyad asmdn grnata uta no maghonah. May that Agni, self refulgent lord of cosmic energy, omnipresent percipient of every thing in existence and destroyer of all negativities and evils by his greatness in the world on prayer, save us all, devotees and celebrants blest with wealth, power and excellence, from sin and scandal. (Rg. 7-12-2) 
1009 :Tvam varuna uta mitro agne tvarh varddhanti matibhir vasisthah. Tve vasu susananani santu yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. peace, prosperity and all round well being of life. (Rg. 7-12-3) 
1010 :Great is Indra by his power and splendour like the cloud charged with rain and waxes with pleasure in the dear devotee's awareness by his child like hymns of adoration. (Rg. 8-6-1) 
1011 :W hen the wise sages with their adorations rise to Indra and surrender to him as their yajnic guide as well as destination, they exclaim: Verily the lord of thunder is our brother, father, mother, si ster,every thing. (Rg. 8-6-3) 
1012 :When the forces of nature carry on the laws of divinity and sustain the children of creation through evolution, and the enlightened sages too carry on the yajna of divine law of truth in their adorations, Indra, immanent divinity, waxes with pleasure. (Rg. 8-6-2) 
1013 :Beauteous manifestations and brilliant radiations of eternal light and power of lord creator, destroyer of want and suffering, dispeller of darkness and negation, ever active and constantly flowing, pure and purifying, come into existence and flow according to divine plan and the cosmic model. (Rg. 9-66-25) 
1014 :Pure and purifying, supreme master of the cosmic chariot and its controller, most refulgent with its light and powers, destroyer of want and suffering, commander and controller of all cosmic powers and forces in action, such is Soma. (Rg. 9-66-26) 
1015 :Pure and purifying Soma, omnipresent with radiations of self- refulgence, omnipotent giver of strength, power and advancement, inspirer of the celebrants and celebrations with divine bliss and energy, come and bless. (Rg. 9-66-27) 
1016 :From here onward sprinkle Soma with love and service, Soma, the spirit of beauty, peace and joy of life, Soma, realised with best of thoughts, effort and determined discipline of meditation, Soma which bears the best materials for creative yajna of personal and social development, Soma which is the leading light of life, realised within in the heart and our Karmas performed in life. (Rg. 9-107-1) 
1017 :For sure, pure and purifying, flow on with protective and promotive forces, gracious, undaunted, more and more charming and blissful. When you are realised in our actions, mixed as one with our energies, will and senses, then we rejoice and celebrate you in our perceptions with hymns of praise, and later in silent communion. (Rg. 9-107-2) 
1018 :Celebrated in our thoughts and perceptions, joy of the sages, power of holy yajnic action, brilliant and blissful, all intelligent and omniscient, we adore you for the augmentation of our intelligence and enlightenment. (Rg. 9-107-3) 
1019 :Distilled is Soma, consecrated in the heart, self- refulgent supreme creative spirit of the universe, virile and generous, dispeller of darkness and deprivation, regal and gracious like a ruler, self-moves, vibrating to the generation of stars and planets. Itself pure, purifying and sanctifying, it moves to manifest in the heart of imperishable Prakrti as it chooses and, like the sun that warms and fertilises, it enlivens the generative centre of life as its own womb of manifestive existence. Thus does Soma create and generate the universe. (Rg.9-82-1) 
1020 :Father and sustainer of all great and small, birds and trees, serious realists and flying dreamers, centre hold of the earth and showers of rain, you abide in the mighty clouds and over the mountains. Your waves and vibrations flow and radiate, flow as sister streams and radiate to the stars and planets, and in holy yajna you vibrate with the music of soma stones and the chant of high priests. (Rg. 9-82-3) 
1021 :Kavir vedhasya paryesi mahinam atyo na mrsto abhi vdjam arsasi. Apasedlian durita soma no mrda ghrta vasanah pari yasi nirnijam. Soma, omniscient visionary and poetic creator, with the desire to enlighten, you radiate to great minds and move to dynamic yajnas of humanity like accelerated energy to its target of achievement. 0 lord of light and peace, be kind, dispelling all evil to nullity. Wearing the grace of beauty and purity of yajnic love and sweetness, you move and embrace humanity for fulfilment. (Rg. 9-82-2) 
1022 :Just as the rays of light share and diffuse the radiance of the sun, so you too share and reflect the golden glories of I ndra, the cosmic soul. Let us meditate on the divine presence and for our share enjoy the ecstasy of bliss vibrating in the world of past and future creation by virtue of Indra's omnipresent majesty. (Rg. 8-99-3) 
1023 :Adore and meditate on Indra, giver of wealth, honour, excellence and bliss. Infinite is his generosity, unsatiating, auspicious his gifts. He does not displease the devotee, does not hurt his desire and prayer, he inspires his mind for the reception of divine gifts. (Rg. 8-99-4) 
1024 :Yata indra bhayamahe tato no abhayam krdhi. Maghavan chagdhi tava tan na utaye vi dviso vi mrdho jahi. Indra, lord indomitable, whoever, whatever and wherever we fear, make us fearless from that. 0 lord of might and world power, pray strengthen us with your powers and protections of the highest order for our safety and advancement. Eliminate the jealous, the Indra, lord of the world's wealth, munificenceand achievement, you alone are the protector, and promoter of the wealth, grandeur, home and honour of the supplicant worshipper. 0 lord of all power and honour, adored and worshipped in hymns of glory, we invoke, invite and exalt you for the munificence and grandeur of life you grant, protect and advance. (Rg. 8-61-14) 
1025 :You, self-existent spirit, distilled and realised in meditative yajna, are the giver of joy to humanity, most ecstatic sustaining power of affirmation, brilliant and blissful, all-time winner of success and victory in yajnic sessions (Rg. 9-67-2) 
1026 :You, stirred by the brave celebrants in yajna and meditation, arise and sanctify loud and bold, pray bring us showers of bliss, highest and most vigorous strength and power for living a life of purity and happy fulfilment. (Rg. 9-67-3) 
1027 :The streams of your peace, beauty and bliss swell like streams of water in flood, and the divines drink of the ecstasy for the attainment of immortality. (Rg. 9-106-8) 
1028 :Ten psychic powerswith the best of their potential adore and exalt that dear divinity, omniscience itself, who, omnipresent, pervades and rejoices with all divinities of the world with divine ecstasy. (Rg.9-98-7) 
1029 :Soma, dearest love of the soul, innately glorious, the glory intensified by spiritual light, vibrant spirit rolling in the consciousness whom ten psychic powers of mind and sense perceive, conceive and exalt, that spirit we cherish and adore. (Rg. 9-98-6) 
1030 :the vedi of yajnic service so that the demon of evil, darkness and ignorance may be expelled from the soul of humanity and destroyed. (Rg. 9-98-10) 
1031 :They adore and exalt that Soma spirit of divine beauty, peace and glory i n thei r pure heart core, the spi rit that is creative and lovable, manifestive, saviour and inspirer, for the achievement of noble virtues worthy of the noble and generous people. (Rg. 9-109-12) 
1032 :Soma, spirit of beauty, grace and glory, divinely created, nobly born, zealous, destroyer of negativity, beatified and celebrated in songs of divine voice, the noblest powers of nature and humanity adore, share and enjoy. (Rg. 9-61-13) 
1033 :As mother cows love, cheer and caress the calf, so let our songs of adoration celebrate and exalt Soma, love and grace of the heart of Indra, life's glory on top of existence. (Rg. 9-61-14) 
1034 :Blessed are they for sure who kindle the fire of yaj na, A gni, and spread the seats of grass open for al I i n faith and love and whose friend is Indra, the mighty youthful soul who brooks no nonsense and delay. (Rg. 8-45-1) 
1035 :Great is their fuel and fire, profuse their praise and song of adoration, expansive their yajna and high their ensign whose friend is Indra, youthful soul, their ruler and defender. (Rg. 8-45-2) 
1036 :U nequalled is I ndra, irresistible, even when there is no war. The mighty hero by the very force of his presence and character throws off the enemy supported by brave warriors all round. Blessed are they whose friend is Indra, the mighty youthful heroic soul. (Rg. 8-45-3) 
1037 :Dear friend, the one sole lord who gives everything in life to the man of charity and generosity is Indra, supreme ruler of the world, who is constant, unmoved and unchallenged. (Rg. 1-84-7) 
1038 :Dear friend, it is Indra, creator of energy, vitality and the joy of soma, who, for the sake of many does special favours to you and makes you shine, and it is he, again, who controls violent force, that which could be anywhere. (Rg. 1-84-9) 
1039 :Dear friend, when would Indra, lord of wealth, power and justice, shake the miserly, uncreative, ungenerous and selfish person like a weed? Who knows? A nd would he listen to our prayers? A ny time! (Rg. 1-84-8) 
1040 :The singers of Gayatri celebrate you, Indra, lord of song and joy, with the hymns of Sama-Veda. The devotees of Rgveda worship Indra, lord of light, with Rks. And the sage scholars of all the Vedas, 0 lord of a hundred noble acts of cosmic yajna, maintain the line of divine worship as the centre-string of the human As the sun-beams radiate with waves of energy from one peak to another of a mountain illuminating each in succession, similarly when a person rises from one peak of action to another, accomplishing one after another as holy duty, then I ndra, lord of light, generously illuminates one meaning of life and mystery after another for him. (Rg. 1-10-2) 
1041 :Indra, lord of light blazing in the sun, protector and promoter of the soma of life and joy, yoke your team of sunbeams like chariot-horses, equal, opposite and complementary as the positive-negative currents of energy-circuit, beautiful in their operative field, generous, pervasive in the skies all round, listen to our prayer and advance the yajna of knowledge and action on earth. (Rg. 1-10-3) 
1042 :Agni, invoked, lighted and blazing refulgent, creator and chief agent of cosmic yajna, universal purifier, bring the divine gifts for us and for the yajamana offering holy materials to the fire, and carry on the yajna for ever. (Rg. 1-13-1) 
1043 :Agni, self-refulgent omniscience, lord self- existent and preserver of the body, poetic power of creation and illumination, lettheyajna rise to the heights of joy among the divinities of nature and bring the honey-sweets of bliss to the dedicated people of brilliance among us.(Rg. 1-13-2) 
1044 :I invoke A gni, universally adorable lord of light and life, in my heart, and kindle the fire in this dear auspicious yajna with offerings of holy materials to be tasted and consumed by the honey flames of fire for the good of the people. (Rg. 1-13-3) 
1045 :A gni, invoked, lighted and honoured by all, you are the lord and agent of yajna for the benefit of humanity. Comeand bring the best powers and divinities of nature in the most comfortable chariot. (Rg. 1-13-4) 
1046 :Whatever wealth of energy and blessed light of w i sdom today at the daw n of sunri se the I ord i mmacul ate and sinless Mitra, universal love and friendship, Aryama, guide and judge on the path of rectitude, Savita, inspirer and generator, and Bhaga, omnipotent and glorious, generate and radiate, that we pray may come and bless us. (Rg. 7-66-4) 
1047 :And the self-refulgent Adityas, self-governing and great imperishable ruling powers of nature, and mother I nfinity, who observe and maintain the great law of existence and disciplines of life, may guide us and protect us over the paths of progress. (Rg. 7-66-6) 
1048 :Indra, lord almighty, commander, controller and inspirer of clouds, mountains and great men of generosity, may our hymns of adoration win your pleasure. Pray create and provide means and methods of sustenance and progress in life, and castoff jealousies and enmities against divinity, knowledge and prayer, our bond between human and divine. (Rg. 8-64-1) 
1049 :Pada panin arddhaso ni badhasva mahcih asi. Na hi tv a has c ana prati. Keep off under foot the haves who hoard and share not. You are great, simply great, the only one. There is none equal, alike or more. (Rg. 8-64-2) 
1050 :You rule over the creative and cooperative men of positive action. You rule over the uncreative and destructive men of negative action as well. Indra, you are the ruler, the ultimate ordainer of good and evil both. (Rg. 8-64-3) 
1051 :Ever wakeful, all intelligent, ever true, pure, purifying and celebrated, Soma abides in the heart core of the visionary sages, and him, loving yajakas dedicated to yajna of love and non-violence, noble of action commanding their body chariot of personality, together serve, adore and worship with high love and devotion of their mind and soul. (Rg. 9-97-37) 
1052 :Sa punana upa sure dadhana obhe apra rodasi vl sa avah. Priya cid yasya priyasasa uti sato dhanam karine na pra yahsat. That Soma, pure and purifying, creator and sustainer, pervades and fills the heaven and earth as it abides in the sun and destroys darkness and ignorance. Dearer than dear are its powers for our protection for sure. M ay Soma give us wealth, honour and excellence as one would give wealth to the artist. (Rg. 9-97-38) 
1053 :Soma, exalted and exalting, pure and purifying, virile and generous, may, we pray, protect and promote us with the light of knowledge by which our forefathers, knowing the meaning and purpose of life step by step with a passionate desire for knowledge, rising to the sun, attained to the ultimate freedom and bliss of heaven. (Rg. 9-97-39) 
1054 :Worship Indra only, instant of action, who most spontaneously rushes to the devotee for protection and upon the evil for punishment, correction or destruction. He is profusely and potently generous, patient and forbearing giver of peace and nourishment to people like the meek cow and motherly earth, saviour from hate and jealousy, most adorable, giver of both material well being (abhyudaya) and spiritual freedom (nihshreyas), most munificent and majestic, and lord ruler and protector of both nature and the soul. (Rg. 8 - 1 - 2 ) 
1055 :The sweetest of honeyed songs of praise and vibrations of homage rise to you flying like victorious, unviolated and invincible chariots laden with gold heading for higher destinations. (Rg. 8-3-15) 
1056 :Kanva iva bhrgavah surya iva visvam id dhitam asata. Indram stomebhir mahayanta ayavah priyamedhaso asvaran. Brilliant scholars and sages as well as brave heroes of the human nation and loving and intelligent citizens of the land, praising and exalting Indra in one vaulting voice, rise and reach the presence of the lord in aworldtheirown likeraysof the sun filling theworld of space they know. (Rg. 8-3-16) 
1057 :Soma, pure, purifying and dynamic by your essential omnipotence, mighty moving with cosmic intelligence and ignition of oceanic particles of Prakrti, you create the sun, generate bio-energy in all containing space and set in motion the stars and planets of the universe. (Rg. 9-110-3) 
1058 :W hile you are with us at heart, 0 Soma, spirit of constant peaceful life, we rejoice with you in the great common-wealth order of governance where, dynamic, pure and purifying, you ever advance to victories in honour, excellence and glory. (Rg. 9-110-2) 
1059 :Thus for immortality, for great dominion and for highest ascension, may that pure, potent and celestial Soma presence flow and radiate as the sweetest taste of life. (Rg. 9-109-3) 
1060 :Soma, spirit of glory and grandeur, loved, realised and reverenced, let Indra, the ruling soul, experience the ecstasy for noble action and efficiency. Let all divinities of the world enjoy the divine presence. (Rg. 9-109-2) 
1061 :The dynamics of the lord's creation instantly in motion, energising the sleeping existences, joyous and joyously moving everything to ecstatic being, all together move across the web of life conceived and created by the lord omnipotent, Indra. N ot without I ndra does any particle, any wave, any world, move pure and sacred as it is. (Rg. 9-69-6) 
1062 :When the mind is joined in concentration with divinity, honey is released and pours forth, divine ecstasy stirs in the heart within, and the continuous stream of soma, overflowing with joy like the uninterrupted ecstasy of the yogis of perfect renunciation, showers upon the blessed soul. (Rg. 9-69-2) 
1063 :joy vibrates with Infinity, the senses having returned inward likecowsto the stall. The enlightened mind and thoughts of the holy soul unite with the hallowed centre of the spirit. The soul breaks through its existential cover, returns to its original imperishable purity, and Soma protects it as a pilgrim cleansed and redeemed. (Rg. 9-69-4) 
1064 :The energy of fire and electri city, scholars of basic science and original vision produce for domestic purpose or for communication and transportation somehow from something they know best. It is of versatile use for defence and protection, universal in nature and character, and an all purpose asset in the home for any service. (Rg. 7-1-2) 
1065 :Preddho ague didihi puro no jasraya sunny a yavistha. Tvaih sasvanta upa yanti vajah. This earth moves round and round eastward abiding in its mother waters of the firmament and revolves round and round its father sustainer, the sun in heaven. (Rg. 10-189-1) 
1066 :The light of this sun radiates from morning till evening like the prana and apana of the cosmic body illuminating the mighty heaven and filling the space between heaven and earth. (Rg. 10-189-2) 
1067 :Thirty stages of the day from every morning to evening does the sun rulewith the rays of itslightwhile songs of adoration are raised and offered to the mighty 'Bird' of heavenly space. (Rg. 10-189-3) 
1068 :M oving close to thevedi of the yajna of love and non-violence, let us chant holy words of thought and devotion in praise of Agni, lord of light and yajna who listens to us from far as well as near. (Rg. 1-74-1) 
1069 :Agni is the eternal lord of yajna who, in gatherings of people meeting for the purpose of fellowship and yajna of love, protects and promotes the wealth of the generous yajamana. (Rg. 1-74-2) 
1070 :M ay Agni, highest giver of peace and comfort, protect our wealth and knowledge and our family and friends of the home and also guard us against all sin and sinners. (Rg. 7-15-3) 
1071 :And let the people praise and cel ebrate A gni who dispels the clouds of darkness, creates and protects the wealth of the charitable yajamana, and gives us victory in the battles for wealth one after another. (Rg. 1-74-3) 
1072 :Agni, leading light of knowledge and power, generous creator and giver, yoke those motive powers of yours to the chariot which are best and fastest and which transport you to the destination of your love and passion gracefully without fail. (Rg. 6-16-43) 
1073 :Agni, leading light of knowledge, generous pioneer, come fast in all your glory, bring us the dearest powers for sustenance and advancement for the sake of peace and well-being, and bring the noble brilliancies along to celebrate success with the delight of soma. (Rg. 6-16-44) 
1074 :Agni, unaging sustainer of life, shining with the light of excellence and blazing with glory, rise up with flames of fire and shineon with inexhaustible splendour, and help the shining people too to rise in the light of knowledge and excellence of life. (Rg. 6-16-45) 
1075 :That silent voice of the generative illuminative Soma of divine food, energy and enlightenment for the dedicated devotee, the ordinary mortal does not perceive. 0 yajakas, ward off the clamours and noises which disturb the meditative yajna as men of wisdom ward them off to save their yajna. (Rg. 9-101-13) 
1076 :As a child feels secure with joy in the arms of its parents, as the lover goes to the beloved, as the groom sits on the wedding vedi, so does the Soma spirit pervade in the natural form of its choice love. (Rg. 9-101-14) 
1077 :That potent Soma, master controller of all powers, means and materials of success in existence, who sustains both heaven and earth, is the saviour power of protection and pervades the universe presiding as omniscient high priest over the vedi of cosmic yajna. (Rg. 9-101-15) 
1078 :Indra, lord of absolute might by nature, si nee birth of the universe, indeed for eternity, you are without a rival, need no leader, no friend and no comrade, but in the dynamics of human life you do want that the human should be your companion in and for his struggle for self-evolution and social progress. (Rg. 8-21-13) 
1079 :You do not just care to choose the rich for companionship, if they are swollen with drink and pride and violate the rules of divinediscipline. Butwhen you attend to the poor and alter their fortune for the better, you are invoked like father with gratitude which the voice of thunder acknowledges and approves. (Rg. 8-21-14) 
1080 :M ay the hundreds and thousands of forces of nature and humanity harnessed to the golden chariot of the universe, radiantwith light and dedicated to divinity, invoke and invite you hither into the heart so that we may experience the bliss of divine presence.(Rg.8-l-24) 
1081 :M ay the vibrant forces of divine energy, joined to your golden chariot of the universe with rhythmic majesty I ike the peacock's feather tail and mighty power with circuitous motion of energy currents, radiate your presence here so that you may acknowledge and accept our love and homage and we experience the bliss of divine presence. (Rg. 8-1-25) 
1082 :Like the eternal lord of love fond of the celebrant's homage, come and accept the devotee's love and faith distilled from life's experience. The flow of the ecstatic celebrant's clai rvoyance pure and sweet is full of ananda and radiates from the heart for spiritual bliss. (Rg. 8-1-26) 
1083 :For the rise of the self to the state of divine refulgence, let us serve and adore Soma, divine spirit of a thousand streams and showers, potent and generous, creator of the milk of life by universal law, dear as father and friend, who, manifestive in the laws of universal existence, pervades the expansive creativity of divine power and is the self-refulgent ruler, generous divinity and the infinite law, truth and ultimate reality itself. (Rg. 9-108-8) 
1084 :I worship you, lord both immanent and transcendent, with all my knowledge, power and potential. You are the ordainer and sustainer of life. I pray for your gift of peace and well-being and yearn for your company, adorable lord, in the yajna of corporate action. (Rg. 6-16-4) 
1085 :Agni, lifeof lifeand light of the universe, present in the i nterior of mother earth, sustai ner of the sun, father of earth and her children, shining in his own eternal self, in the individual soul and in the world of imperishable Prakrti, the spirit of the universe, pervades and inspires the ruling lawsof eternal truth andtheworld of existence. (Rg. 6-16-35) 
1086 :Agni, lord all knowing, all watching, who shine in the light of the sun, bless us with the food of life that sustains the children of the earth. (Rg. 6-16-36) 
1087 :Divine Soma, moved and energised by the surge of golden impulse, joins its potency with the senses and mind, and thus seasoned and empowered, vibrant with vitality, it moves to the holiness of the heart like a sanative, or as a priest going to a yajnic enclosure, seat and anchor of sensitive visionary powers of humanity. (Rg. 9-97-1) 
1088 :Come, friends, and, with happy chant of pure holy Sama songs, adore Indra, pure and bright spirit and power of the world, who feels pleased and exalted by honest unsullied songs of adoration. Let the supplicant with a pure heart please and win the favour of Indra and rejoice. (Rg. 8-95-7) 
1089 :M ay Indra, pure and absolute spirit, come to us and bless us. M ay the pure immaculate spirit come with pure modes of action and protection. M ay the pure spirit bring us wealth, honour and excellence. May pure divinity, absolute peace and bliss, be pleased and exalted. (Rg. 8-95-8) 
1090 :Indra, spirit pure and absolute, may bring us wealth, honour and excellence. The pure may bring jewels of life for the generous yajamana. I ndra, the pure, in order to eliminate evil and dispel darkness and suffering, loves to give us strength, sustenance and advancement, the lord pure and blissful that he is. (Rg. 8-95-9) 
1091 :the wealth and power of brilliant A gni, we study and concentrate on f i re energy i n focus and structure a joyous song of success in praise of the rich and generous power touching the lights of heaven and for sure that would make the achievement possible. (Rg. 5-13-2) 
1092 :M ay A gni, life and light and fire of the world, yajaka, creator and giver of wealth among the people, hear and accept our prayer, come and join the brilliant creative geniuses and bless us with wealth.(Rg.5-13-3) 
1093 :A gni, you are all pervasive, loving and integrative, creator and giver, cherished and venerable leader for choice. By you is the yajna of life and the yajna of the social order enacted and extended. (Rg. 5-13-4) 
1094 :The celebrants' songs of adoration in honour of the generous, virile, adorable and life bearing Soma, sustainer of three worlds arise in homage of love and faith. Holding precious treasures and powers of the world like Varuna, all covering space, and the ocean holding the deep seas, the wielder of world jewels bestows gifts of choice on mankind. (Rg. 9-90-2) 
1095 :Commander of a multitude of heroes, himself brave in every way, patient and mighty, all time victor, generous giver of all wealth, honour and excellence, wielding weapons of instant light and fire power, unconquerable in contests of values and destroyer of the enemy in battles of arms, may we pray, flow and purify us. (Rg. 9-90-3) 
1096 :Bountiful bearer of theabundantworld of heaven and earth, creating and clearing the wide paths of truth and rectitude, making them free from fear and mutual conflict, enlightening us on the dynamics of karma in the flow of existence, expanding heavenly lights of the dawns of successive days, pray speak loud and bold and clear and bring us great victories of sustenance, power, honour and excellence in the struggle for progress in a state of purity. (Rg. 9-90-4) 
1097 :Indra, lord all powerful, ruler of the world, yours is the honour, yours is the creation of wealth and joy. All by yourself, unsubdued, you eliminate irresistible forms of evil and darkness by the power you wield for the people. (Rg. 8-90-5) 
1098 :Tamu tva nunam asura pracetasam radho bhagam ivemahe. Mahiva krttih sarana ta indra pra te sumna no asnavan. Indra, lord of vibrant energy and power, we look forward to you as our partner, enlightened ruler and master, and competent giver of reward for our action and endeavour. Your very presence is our shelter, a very home like the great mother earth, and we pray we may ever enjoy thefavourof your good will and benevolence. (Rg. 8-90-6) 
1099 :We choose to worship you, A gni, most adorable, worthy of worship, self-refulgent lord overthe divinities of existence, imperishable and eternal creator of the yajna of this universal order of the world. (Rg. 8-19-3) 
1100 :Apam napatam subhagam sudiditim agnim u sresthasocisam. Sa no mitrasya varunasya so apama sumnam yaksate divi. We worship Agni, protector and promoter of water energy and men of energy, lord of grandeur and glory and the holy refulgence of nature that shines bright with the highest flames of fire and light. In the light and fire of cosmic yajna, H e is the giver of joy in the light of day and the bliss of peace in the night, and He is the giver of the nectar of pleasure in the liquid run of water and the dynamics of karmic flow. (Rg. 8-19-4) 
1101 :Lord of light and power, let the man you protect in fighting armies, whom you inspire to join battles for knowledge and development, who protect these people who have lived free since time immemorial, let him be the leader, ruler and protector of the people and their wealth and power. (Rg. 1-27-7) 
1102 :No one is his challenger, no vanquisher of the hero whose battle for life and humanity is worthy of praise. (Rg. 1-27-8) 
1103 :M ay he, protector of humanity, be the winner of battle for progress with the horses that run fast and reach the goal. With the scholars and sages, may he be the generous benefactor and saviour of the people. (Rg. 1-27-9) 
1104 :Ten generous, agile, spontaneous and simultaneous sister faculties of the self-controlled, self- established yogi together concentrate, communicate and glorify Hari, Soma spirit of divine joy that eliminates want and suffering, and the Spirit, pervading the vibrations of divinity, the light born of the sun, radiates like a constant wave, reaches and settles in the heart core of the blessed soul, the seat of divinity. (The faculties are faculties of perception, thought and will which normally wander over theworld of outside reality but which are controlled, concentrated and inverted in meditation and focussed on the presence of divinity within, and then the presence reveals itself in all its refulgent glory.) (Rg. 9-93-1) 
1105 :Like a child fulfilled and secure with mother's and grandmother's love, the loving Soma, generous treasure home of universal gifts of life, fulfils the celebrant with showers of pranic energy and, like a lover meeting his Iady Iove, blesses his consecrated heart, and therein vibrates with the dedicated soul with divine radiations of light in thought, word and deed. (Rg. 9-93-2) 
1106 :Soma, spirit of blessed light and omniscient power, essence of self-refulgent beauty, fills the inviolable receptacles of nature with milky nourishment which the man of enlightenment, joining the milky flow, enjoys. The radiations of light, currents of energy and the words of wisdom all shine and elevate the soul in all situations of life with spiritual food as they shower him with the wealth and honours of immaculate order. (Rg. 9-93-3) 
1107 :Piba sutasya rasino matsva na indra gomatah. Apimo bodhi sadhamadye vrdhe ? smart avantu te dhiyah. Indra, resplendent and mighty, karma yogi, great performer, come and have a drink of our delicious festive soma distilled and mixed with milk and cream, share the ecstasy in the yajnic halls, enlighten us, your own people, for progress and prosperity, and may your thoughts and wisdom protect, promote and guide us in life. (Rg. 8-3-1) 
1108 :Bhuyama te sumatau vajino vayam ma na star abhimataye. Asmans citrabhir avatad abhisti- bhir a nah sumnesu yamaya. In your guidance and goodwill may we be prosperous and progressive with vibrancy. Hurt us not lest we fall a prey to an enemy. Protect us and advance us to all kinds of success with fulfilment of our aspirations, and lead us in a life of happiness, refinement and grace. (Rg. 8-3-2) 
1109 :Thrice seven 'cows', creative powers of natural evolution, generate the milky strain of vitality added to the evolving reality in the service of the creator Soma in the cosmic yajna in absolute time and space, Soma who also created four other beautiful orders of existence for the glory and sanctity of existence which grows by the laws of cosmic dynamics. (Rg. 9-70-1) 
1110 :(The seven cows may be interpreted as the seven evolutes of Prakrti: mahan, ahankara and five subtle elements of ether or akasha, energy or vayu, fi re or agni, water or apah, and earth or prthivi. Three are orders of sattva or thought, rajas or motion, and tamas or matter. This makes the thrice seven, the four other beautiful orders of existence may be interpreted as mana (mind), buddhi (discriminative intelligence), chitta (memory) and ahankara (l-sense or existential personality). Another interpretation could be the four Vedas, knowledge, the corresponding order of existence in terms of awareness and expression.) 
1111 :He, loving, sharing and pervading the immortal beauty of existence, orders and adorns both heaven and earth with his art, intelligence and poetic sublimity, also vesting the vapours of the middle regions with his might and splendour. Those who know the reality of the lord's creation alongwith his power, love and generosity really know and share the bliss. (Rg. 9-70-2) 
1112 :Te asya santu ketavo mrtyavo dabhyaso janusi ubhe anu. Yebhir nrmna ca devyd ca punata ad id rajanam manana agrbhnata. M ay those radiations of the light and power of this divine Soma, spirit of bliss, free from mortality, deception or unreality, by which the lord strengthens, purifies and sanctifies acts and virtues both human and natural, be in accord with life, human as well as of other forms, and may humanity receive and internalise that divine spirit of love, peace and refulgence with all their thought, thoughtful action and meditation. (Rg.9-70-3) 
1113 :Tat te yajno ajayata tad arka uta haskrtih. Tadvisvam abhibhur asi yaj jatam yac ca jantvam. And then proceeds the cosmic yajna, formation of light, sun and the joyous agni and vayu. And thus you remain and ruleastheSupremeoverwhathascome into being and what is coming into being. (Rg. 8-89-6) 
1114 :You move the ripening flow of sap in the veins of maturing forms of life. You raise and place the sun in the high heaven. 0 celebrants, as in the heat of fire, temper and shine your sama songs of adoration and, with noble hymns of praise, sing resounding Brhat samans of worship with love in honour of adorable Indra. (Rg. 8-89-7) 
1115 :Indra, lord of energy and paradisal bliss, rejoice. You have drunk of the great and exhilarating soma, the divinity and ecstasy of life fresh from the very flask of existence. Vibrant lord of the knights of horse, that joy of the drink of life is exciting, the very thrill of being. Lord virile and generous, you are the shower of bliss and that soma is soothing like the moon, tempestuous as waves of energy, yes, and a thousand-fold invitation to live, the call of life, for you. (The call of life is the call of existence for the human soul too to be born into this wonderful world of beauty, joy and peace.) (Rg. 1-175-1) 
1116 :are, valiant and generous, dispenser, disposer, giver and unifier. Inspire and accelerate the chariot of humanity. Heroic and courageous lord of challenges, burn the lawless brute with your light and lustre of justice as the blaze of fire burns an empty vessel on the hearth (because there is nothing in it except its empty self). (Rg. 1-175-3) 
1117 :Soma, lord of peace and plenty, give us holy showers of waters, wave on wave of the rain, and give us abundant food, energy and knowledge free from pollution and negativities. (Rg. 9-49-1) 
1118 :Shower and purify us with that stream of power and purity of peace and plenty by which our senses, mind and intelligence, socially and positively motivated, may be balanced in our personality and we may feel at home with ourselves. (Rg. 9-49-2) 
1119 :Let ghrta shower in streams, pure and powerful in our yajnas, 0 lord and guardian of the noble and divine worshippers. Bring us fulfilment and purify all our intentions, purposes and motivations of life. (Rg. 9- 49-3) 
1120 :For energy, give us showers in streams of imperishable purity of heart, and let the noble devotees hear the blissful music of the rain. (Rg. 9-49-4) 
1121 :May Soma, pure and purifying, all pervasive, destroy all evils and negativities, and continue to illumine the brilliant regions of the universe, macrocosmic as well as microcosmic, as ever before. (Rg. 9-49-5) 
1122 :In consequence and return, 0 scholars and citizens of the land, be grateful to this Indra, brilliant ruler, lover of the peace and pleasure of the soma of knowledge and enlightenment and promoter of scholars and men of truth and naturalness. Do ail possible homage to him with ample measures of work and knowledge distilled like soma in the essence from your brilliant work and noble conduct. (Rg. 6-42-2) 
1123 :pure and brilliant soma of knowledge and yajnic action in response to his magnanimity, the wise and adorable lord of the world would acknowledge and appreciate each act of homage. (Rg. 6-42-3) 
1124 :Offer songs of adoration to Soma, lord sustainer of the universe, self-potent and omnipresent, who pervades boundless even to the heights of highest heavens. (Rg. 9-11-4) 
1125 :As soma juice is extracted with stones worked by hands, refined and seasoned with honey and milk, so 0 lord, let my mind be refined and purified with repeated chants of the sacred voice, and let it be sanctified with the honey of devotion and let it be absorbed in the honey sweet of divinity. (Rg. 9-11-5) 
1126 :(Indra is interpreted in this Sukta as the omnipotent, self-refulgent lord and light of the universe, as the sublime soul, and as the enlightened mind according to the context of meaning reflected by the intra-structure of the mantra.) 
1127 :Indra who breaks off the nine and ninty strongholds of darkness, ignorance and suffering by the force of his lustrous arms and, as the dispeller of darkness, destroys the crooked serpentine evil of the world: (Rg. 8-93-2) 
1128 :That samelndrawho is blissful, a graciousfri end and companion, commands the wealth of cows and horses, nourishment and achievement, knowledge and enlightenment and distils for us power, honour and excellence from nature such as the torrential showers of rain. (Rg. 8-93-3) 
1129 :May the mighty refulgent sun hold, shower, protect and promote the honey sweets of life's soma nourishment, and bear and bring untainted health and long life for the performer and promoter of yajna, the sun which, energised by Vayu energy of divine nature protects and sustai ns al I forms of I ife by its very essence, shines and rules life in many ways. (Rg. 10-170-1) 
1130 :The mighty refulgent sun, destroyer of unfriendly forces, darkness and evil, anti-life elements, adversaries and enemies, rises, bearing the light that is the highest giver of food, energy and growing advancement. Truly vested in the established order of nature in the solar region, blissfully sustained, it is the highest killer of negative and destructive forces prevailing in life and nature. (Rg. 10-170-2) 
1131 :This mighty best and highest light of lights is exalted as universally pervasive winner and giver of wealth. This world illuminant light, great sun, is the light for the world's vision. It expands far and wide, undaunted lustre and majesty that it is, imperishable and eternal. (Rg.10-170-3) 
1132 :Indra kratum na a bhara pita putrebhyo yatha. Siksa no asmin puruhuta yamani jiva jyoti rasimah i. Bring us the divine vision, will and intelligence as father does for his children. 0 lord universally invoked and worshipped, instruct us as a teacher at this present time so that we, ordinary souls, may have the new light of life and living experience of Divinity. (Rg. 7-32-26) 
1133 :Adyadya svah sva indra trasva pare ca nah. Visva ca no jaritrnt satpate aha diva naktam ca raksisah. tomorrow and beyond, lord saviour and protector of the good and true, I ndra, save and protect us, your cel ebrants and supplicants, all days, day and night. (Rg. 8-61-17) 
1134 :A crushing warrior, commanding magnificence, power and universal riches, self-sufficient, virile, joiner of all with karmic destiny, 0 lord of infinite good actions, both your arms are abundantly generous and hold the thunderbolt of justice, reward and punishment both as deserved. (Rg. 8-61-18) 
1135 :Wishing for marriage, or looking forward to good progeny, liberally giving in charity, or meditating to realise the light of divinity, we pray for the living flow of the waters of Sarasvati, radiating light of divinity, the eternal ocean whence flow the light and the waters of life. (Rg. 7-96-4) 
1136 :And may Sarasvati, dynamic stream of light, knowledge and speech, dearest among seven lovely sister streams of knowledge, word, and mind and senses, loving and blissful, be adorable and remain favourable. (Rg. 6-61-10) 
1137 :We concentrate and meditate on the radiant glory of self-refulgent lord Savita, lord giver of light and life, who may, we pray, inspire and energise our mind and intelligence. That glory alone is worthy of choice and meditation. (Rg. 3-62-10) 
1138 :zealous for learning I am, born of learned parents, kindly take me up as a disciple, train me as an expert of soma- yajna, a scholar of language and communication with a vision of the Word and meaning, and as an artist and craftsman of eminence. (Rg. 1-18-1) 
1139 :Agni, heat and energy of lifedivine, giveusgood health and long age with purity, create and bring us food, energy and excellence, and throw off and keep away all evils and negativities from us. (Rg. 9-66-19) 
1140 :Great is your power and potential for us over the wealth and excellence of heavenly and earthly values, culture and conduct and behaviour. Great is your rule and order over the divinities of nature and humanity. (Rg. 5-68-3) 
1141 :They live, serve, strive and search for the realisation of Rtam, eternal and universal values of Truth and Dharma, by their earnest pursuit of truth and Dharma in life and conduct, Rtam, and thus, free from hate, jealousy and violence, achieve the strength and excellence they long for and rise, shining in merit as leading lights of humanity. (Rg. 5-68-4) 
1142 :Harbingers of showers from heaven, making the waters flow on earth, creating, preserving and promoting the energy, fertility and production of the generous earth and environment, ruling and realising the desires and aspirations of humanity, M itra and Varuna bring about a great and expansive haven of peace, prosperity and felicity on earth. (Rg. 5-68-5) 
1143 :Pious soulsin meditation communewith thegreat and gracious lord of existence immanent in the steady universe and transcendent beyond. Brilliant are they with the lord of light and they shine in the heaven of bliss. (Rg. 1-6-1) 
1144 :Scholars of science dedicated to I ndra study and meditate on the lord's omnipotence of light, fire and wind, and harness the energy I ike two horses to a chariot, both beautiful, equal and complementary as positivenegative currents, fiery red, powerful and carriers of people. (Rg. 1-6-2) 
1145 :C h i I d ren of th e ea rth, k n o w T h at w h o c reates light and knowledge for the ignorant in darkness and gives form and beauty to the formless and chaotic, and reg en erate you rsel vesbyvirtueofthemenofknowledge and passion for action. (Rg. 1-6-3) 
1146 :Ayaih soma indra tubhyam sunve tubhyam pavate tvamasya pahi. Tvam ha yam cakrse tv am vavrsa indum madaya yujyaya somam. Indra, 0 soul of life, 0 man, this soma spirit of life and light, this beauty and joy is created for you; it flows, illuminates and sanctifies, for you; take it, live it, protect and advance it, don't destroy it. Indeed you create it, it is your choice to create it. And whatever you do and choose to do is for your mutual joy and indispensable togetherness. 0 man, enjoy the beauty and vibrancy of life, maintain and advance it for peace in mutual interest in a spirit of interdependence and cooperation. (Rg. 9-88-1) 
1147 :The great exalted soma spirit of life's vibrancy, like a great chariot of abundant comfort, capacity and possibility is enjoined for achieving many kinds of wealth, honours and excellences, and then all things born, created and achieved, all high ups, giving showers of joy in the exciting field of life honour, adore and celebrate the soma spirit of life divine. (Rg. 9-88-2) 
1148 :Agni, self-refulgent leading light of the universe, you are the chief highpriest of all yajnic developments of nature and of all creative and developmental programmes of humanity for common universal good along with the brilliancies of nature and nobilities of humanity among the human community. (Rg. 6-16-1) 
1149 :indestructible, goes forward with his innate power and intelligence, inspiring, advancing and accelerating yajnic programmes of creative and productive corporate action. (Rg. 3-27-7) 
1150 :Agni, tempestuous power and vibrant accomplisher of yajnic creation, is adopted, lighted and accelerated in top gear in scientific and technological programmes of friendly and cooperative nature. (Rg. 3-27-8) 
1151 :Agni, lord of our love and choice, as parent and teacher, bears the natural child, seed of evolving humanity, in protective and educational custody and, with expansive intelligence, completes the growth and accomplishment of the child to the future protector and promoter of human expertise and perfection through educational rebirth, into the full man as a 'dvija 1 . (Rg. 3-27-9) 
1152 :The aspirants know the one inmate spirit of their common home and they all abide and move together in and with the one intimate spirit of their own kind as children move around attached with their mothers (each with the one that is his, but all mothers are the same, the one common Soul). (Rg. 8-72-14) 
1153 :Agni, receiving, kindling and consuming the oblations in the flames, turns the havi into light in heaven as offering in the cup of faith to Indra. (So does the yogi turn his thoughts through contemplation into light and joy in the higher personality to offer it as homage to Indra.) (Rg. 8-72-15) 
1154 :Tad id asa bhuvanesu jyestham yato jajha ugras tvesannnnah. Sadyo jajnano ni rinati satrunanu yam visve madantyumah. Thatlndra, Brahma, isthefirstand highest among all the worlds in existence, of which, as the original cause, is born the blazing, refulgent potent sun which, always rising every moment, destroys the negativities which damage life and by which all positive and protective powers and people of the world rejoice and celebrate life. (Rg. 10-120-1) 
1155 :Vavrdhanah savasa bhuryojah satrur dasaya bhiyasam dadhati. Avyanac ca vyanac ca sasni sam te navanta prabhrta madesu. Growing mighty in strength, immensely lustrous, destroyer of negativities, it strikes fear into the heart of forces causing damage to life and the environment. 0 Bountiful purifier and sustainer of the breathing and non-breathing world, all the people and powers which receive sustenance from you join to do honour to you in their joy and celebration of life. (Rg. 10-120-2) 
1156 :A nd they all, celebrants of divinity, surrender all actions and prayers to you when they join in couples and grow to three in the family. 0 lord sweeter than sweetness itself, join the sweets of life with honey and with divine sweetness and bliss create life overflowing with love and ecstasy. (Rg. 10-120-3) 
1157 :The great and powerful sun drinks up the soma, essence of vital juices reinforced with herbal elixir, matured in three containers, i.e., the earth, the sky and the heaven of light, and distilled by light and wind while it shines and energises the essences. He who delights in energising this sun, greatest of the great in nature, to do great things, who blesses and continues to bless this blazing power of light is the eternal, ever true, self-refulgent Lord Supreme, blissful as the moon. A nd he who would love to do great things vast and worthy of the great, he, true and bright as the moon, should serve and meditate on this lord of unbounded light and energy. (Rg. 2-22-1) 
1158 :Thejiva, individual soul, born in human form with the potential to know and act, courage and splendour, carries on the business of life and grows with vigour and valour, challenging, victorious and brilliant with vision and judgement. Indra, lord of life, all giver, provides whatever wealth and power is loved and valued by the pious and worshipful soul. M ay the soul of man, blessed and true as the moon, join and serve this supreme lord Indra, self-refulgent, eternal and true, in prayer, worship and meditation. (Rg. 2-22-3) 
1159 :The mighty universal energy with its own electric force and its action fills up the heaven and earth with universal water vapours full like a reservoir, and it continues to grow by the omnipotence of the omni present lord I ndra, the self-refulgent I ndra. 11 holds within its womb the other, wealth of waters, releases the waters and stays larger and mightier. The lord self- refulgent who creates and blesses this mighty bright universal yajnic energy of electricity is Indra, eternal and ever blissful as the moon. Enlighten us, 0 lord, with energy and bliss. (Rg. 2-22-2) 
1160 :To the best of your knowledge and culture and with the best of your language, worship and adore I ndra, protector of stars and planets, lands and cows, language and culture, creator of the dynamics of existence and protector of its constancy. (Rg. 8-69-4) 
1161 :Let the vibrations of divinity, like crimson rays of dawn which bring the sun to the earth, bring Indra on to our sacred grass where we humans meet and pray and celebrate the lord in song together. (Rg. 8-69-5) 
1162 :Lands and cows, suns and planets, indeed all objects in motion, exude for Indra, wielder of thunder, the ichor of emotional adoration seasoned with ecstasy like honey sweet milk mixed with soma which he receives close at hand and cherishes.(Rg. 8-69-6) 
1163 :successin all fields of life. You are the maker of leaders and giver of the wealth and honours of life. Of such great lord of glory and power, promoter and protector of strength and power, we pray for wealth, honour and excellence worthy of your glory. (Rg. 8-90-2) 
1164 :Pratnarh piyusam purvyam yad ukthyarh maho gahad diva a nir adhuksata. Indram abhi jayamanam sam asvaran. That nectar of divinity, eternal and adorable, which the ancient sages distilled from the mighty great and infinite heaven of light, and which they perceived rising for the soul while they sang in adoration, that same nectar, 0 Soma, may shower on us too, we pray. (Rg. 9-110-8) 
1165 :And some men of vision who can perceive the adorable presence worthy of attainment, and some divinely blest lovers of the life sustainer Soma who adore and exalt him, these reveal the mystery and majesty of the supreme Soma spirit as the sun reveals Adha yad ime pavamana rodasi ima ca visva bhuvanabhi majmana. Yuthe na nistha vrsabho vi rajasi. A nd then, 0 pure and purifying Soma, as long as these heaven and earth and all these regions of the world you wield with your might abide, you abide as the master in the centre of the multitude. (Rg. 9-110-9) 
1166 :Agni, eternal lord omniscient, this divine knowledge, blissful, sweet and musical in Gayatri and other musical metres, ever new and giver of new ideas, pray reveal it to the sages and whisper it into our soul. (Rg. 1-27-4) 
1167 :Versatile lord of wide and various knowledge such as analysis of sea waves and water particles, come soon, you always give a shower of knowledge to the man of faith, reverence and generosity. (Rg. 1-27-6) 
1168 :Lord of knowledge and power, in the highest, medium and closest battles and businesses of life, enlighten us and give us the joy and wealth of life both material and spiritual. (Rg. 1-27-5) 
1169 :I have received from my father super intelligence of the universal mind and law, I have realise it too in the soul, and I feel reborn like the refulgent sun.(Rg.8-6-10) 
1170 :With the realisation of ancient and eternal knowledge and all my thought and will I sanctify and adorn my words and voice in song like a wise sage, and, by that, Indra, lord of light and power, vests me with strength and excellence. (Rg. 8-6-11) 
1171 :There are men who do not adore you, and there are sages who adore you, (both ways you are acknowledged and adored by praise or protest). 0 lord thus adored by me and pi eased, pray accept my adorati on and let us rise. (Rg. 8-6-12) 
1172 :Agni, divine fire and spirit of life, born of divine energy, force and power, you love and accept our songs and havi offered into theyajnavedi. You love and accept our homage along with all other versions of agni, vital energy, present in nature's divinities and in living beings. Pray, along with all these, exalt our homage and songs of adoration. Pra sa visvebhir agnibhir agnih sa yasya vaji- nah. Tanaye toke asmad a samyah vajaih pari- vrtah. May that Agni, along with all other universal forms of heat, whose living versions are passion, creativity and heroic expression, come fully girt about with power, passion and spiritof advancement and bless us and our kith and kin Tvaih no ague agnibhir brahma yajham ca varddhaya. Tvaih no devatataye rayo danaya codaya. Agni, leading light of the world, by the gifts of enlightenment increase and develop our knowledge and corporate action, and inspire and enlighten us for the service of the divinities to win their gifts of wealth, honour and excellence. (Rg. 10-141-6) 
1173 :Tve soma prathama vrktabarhiso mahe vajaya sravase dhiyam dadhuh. Sa tvaih no vira vir- yaya codaya. Into you, 0 Soma, did ancient sages of uninvolved mind with yajnic dedication concentrate and focus their mind and senses for the attainment of a high order of spiritual enlightenment. 0 Soma spirit of divinity that enlightened the sages, pray inspire and enlighten us too with that same divine manliness of vision and action. (Rg. 9-110-7) 
1174 :Bearing in handsasif, and maintaining in balance by evolutionary powers, you hold and control the means of life sustenance, and release them in constant flow of food and energy like an inexhaustible stream of water for the maintenance and fulfilment of common humanity. (Rg. 9-110-5) 
1175 :Immortal Soma, for mortal humanity you create peace and pleasure radiating in the operative laws of eternal and immortal blissful dynamics of existence, vesting in mortals the energy and ambition to live, and you move on ever in union with mortals and immortals. (Rg. 9-110-4) 
1176 :Prepare, offer and regale Indra with the nectar drink of faith and performance. He values, enjoys and promotes the honey sweets of peace, pleasure and progress and, with his power and grandeur, inspires the people with will and competence and ambition for progress and excellence. (Rg. 8-24-13) 
1177 :I reach the lord protector and controller of the moving worlds, the omnipotent who enjoins the soul with the world of nature, and I closely whisper in prayer: Listen to the celebrant devotee who is keen to move from humanity to divinity and deserves to be accepted. (Rg. 8-24-14) 
1178 :Pray listen, Indra, dearest lord of life, true it is that no one born ever before or after was greater or mightier than you, none by wealth and power, none by competence and advancement, none by songs of prayer and adoration, none like you. (Rg. 8-24-15) 
1179 :Indra is the resounding source of fresh energies, roaring expression of maiden youthfulness, protector and promoter of sacred sources of production and nourishment such as cows which must not be killed or hurt, and he is the relentless inexhaustible keeper of your arrows for your targets of defence and development. (Rg. 8-69-2) 
1180 :Agni, self-refulgent lord giver of wealth, honour and excellence, loves to have your fire of yajnic action sprinkled with overflowing ladle of ghrta and the highest refined action. Serve him closely, feed the fire to the full, let the flames rise, and the generous lord refulgent would lead you to the heights of prosperity and excellence. (Rg. 7-16-11) 
1181 :Let the brilliant, noble and generous leaders of humanity choose, sanctify and anoint that intelligent all-aware person as Agni, leader, ruler and high-priest of the yajnic social order of love, peace and nonviolence, who would create and bear the jewel wealth and values of life and high power and prestige of the noblest order for generous self-sacrificing people dedicated to the yajna of the social system.(Rg.7-16-12) 
1182 :There is seen the light of Agni, best knower of the ways of life, where people direct and concentrate their vows of piety and discipline. Let our songs of adoration rise and reach A gni, self-revealed, who opens the paths of progress and urges us on to reach the goal of rectitude for noble people. (Rg.8-103-1) 
1183 :From that gift of light the children of earth shine and continue doing their daily duties. 0 people, do servicein homagetoAgni, giver of light and athousand other gifts as in yajnic generosity. Do so with your heart and soul, adore him sincerely by thought and action. (Rg. 8-103-3) 
1184 :Agni, the sun, lover of holy admirers, sitting as if on top of heaven in glory, turns his rays of light in circuitto the mother earth for her children.(Rg.8-103-2) 
1185 :Agni, heat and energy of lifedivine, giveusgood health and long age with purity, create and bring us food, energy and excellence, and throw off and keep away all evils and negativities from us. (Rg. 9-66-19) 
1186 :Agni is the light of life and fire of passion, pure and purifying energy ever radiative, universal inspirer of all people on earth and energiserof all five faculties, adorable leader of entire humanity and guiding spirit of the corporate life of all human communities together. We adore, serve and pray for the favour of such generous father of the household of humanity. (Rg. 9-66-20) 
1187 :Agni, pray radiate and purify us. Lord of holy action, bless us with holy lustre, noble courage and virility. Bear and bring us wealth, honour and excellence with promotive health and nourishment. (Rg. 9-66-21) 
1188 :Agni, light of Divinity, fire of life, generous and brilliant giver of knowledge and enlightenment, with a sweet and lustrous tongue, bright and blissful, you bear and bring the divinities of nature and nobilities of humanity to the vedi and serve them from here with light and energy. (Rg. 5-26-1) 
1189 :Agni, pure and purifier, light of fire feeding on ghrta, showerer of life's beauty and grace, shining with manifold lustre, indeed the very light and bliss of heaven, we pray: With a sweet and lustrous tongue of flame full of bliss, bring for us the nobilities and divinities of nature and humanity for a feast of pleasure and enlightenment and serve them with love and reverence. (Rg. 5-26-2) 
1190 :Agni, creative visionary of the light of heaven, in our yajnic project of love and non-violence, we invoke and enkindle you, universally great, self-refulgent and giver of the gifts of peace and enlightenment. (Rg. 5-26-3) 
1191 :Lord adorable all over the world in the affairs of enlightenment, protect and advance us with your care and powers of defence and development in the transactions of knowledge and happiness of the people with your heart and soul. (Rg. 1-79-7) 
1192 :Agni, lord of wealth and power, bless us with cherished wealth and power, formidable and invincible in all the battles of life, overcoming all and ever. (Rg. 1-79-8) 
1193 :Agni, lord of life, light and wealth, bring us and bless us with wealth along with knowledge, science and technology that may provide nourishment and health for all, soothing and joyful for happy living.(Rg.1-79-9) 
1194 :Let our thought, will and actions research and develop fire energy I ike a fleet or horse spurred to battle for victory so that thereby we may achieve the real wealth of wealths. (Rg. 10-156-1) 
1195 :Agni, light of life, ruler of existence, let the unaging sun, star of good fortune, rise high in heaven so that it may bring light and energy for humanity and enhance their well being. (Rg. 10-156-4) 
1196 :Agni, light and fire of life, you are the essential brilliant definition and identity of humanity, blazing ensign of human culture, dearest, best, closest, freest, bearing food, energy and enlightenment for the celebrant. Pray listen, enlighten, and bless.(Rg. 10-156-5) 
1197 :This Agni is the highest lord and master of all on top of heaven and earth and gives energy and sustenance to the seeds of life in the waters of the universe. (Rg. 8-44-16) 
1198 :Agni, you are the lord and protector of the peace and bliss of heaven. You rule over the wealth, honour and excellence of the world. I pray that I may adore and celebrate your divine glory and abide in heavenly peace and joy under your divine protection. (Rg. 8-44-18) 
1199 :Agni, light and life of the world, your fires and flames, lights and lightnings, pure, white and undefiled, shine and radiate all over spaces. (Rg. 8-44-17) 
1200 :Agni, who among people is your brother that knowswell? Who isthegiver? Who i s the yaj aka? W ho are you? W herein do you abide. (Rg. 1-75-3) 
1201 :Agni, you are the brother and saviour of the people. You are the friend. You are so dear and affectionate a source of fulfilment. You are the friend of friends, adorable for your companions. (Rg. 1-75-4) 
1202 :Agni, do yajna for Mitra and Varuna, pranic energy of prana and apana. Do yajna for the divine energies of nature. Do yajna for Rtam, promotion of Eternal Knowledge of divine Law. Do yajna for the sake of your own home and for self-control and self-culture. (Rg. 1-75-5) 
1203 :Agni, worthy of worship, worthy of reverence and salutations, virile and generous, is beautiful, it conquers the darkness of the world and is lighted and raised in yajnas. (Rg. 3-27-13) 
1204 :Virile and generous, Agni is lighted and raised, it shines and blazes. It is the carrier of fragrance to the divinities of heaven and earth. Devotees bearing sacred offerings worship it in yajna. (Rg. 3-27-14) 
1205 :Agni, virile and generous as showers of rain, refulgent lord of light and yajna, we, overflowing at heart with faith and generosity, light the fire of yajna rising and shining across the vast spaces. (Rg. 3-27-15) 
1206 :Agni, lord of light and fire, kindled, fed and rising, your lofty and expansive flames, shining and blazing, pure, powerful and purifying, go on rising higher and higher. (Rg. 8-44-4) 
1207 :Agni, lord of beauty and bliss, let my ladles overflowing with ghrta rise and move close to you. Pray accept and enjoy our oblations and our songs.(Rg.8-44-5) 
1208 :I adore Agni, lord of light and fire, blissful, generous yajaka, high priest of regular seasonal yajna, wondrous illustrious, blazing brilliant lord of wealth and honour, and I pray may the lord listen and bless. (Rg. 8-44-6) 
1209 :Agni, save us by the first voice, and by the second, by three voices, and, 0 lord of cosmic power, ultimate haven and home of existence, protect and promote us by the four. (Rg. 8-60-9) 
1210 :(This is a very simple and yet a most comprehensive verse. The first voice could be the voice of average humanity; second, words of the sages; third, voice of the soul; fourth, the voice of divinity. Another way to understand: One, two, three or all thefour Veda's voice. Yet another: voice of the soul in the rising sequence of the four mantras of Aum as described in the Upanishads. And then the four stages of language in the descending orderfrom divine to the human: Para, Pashyanti, M adhyama and Vaikhari.) 
1211 :Saveusfrom all evils of the world, from all selfish grabbers. Protect us in our struggles and lead us to victory. We approach you and pray to you, closest to us, our own, for the success of our divine yajna and rising advancement in life. (Rg. 8-60-10) 
1212 :M ighty self-refulgent sun, A gni, constant master illuminator of heaven and earth, blazing and commanding terrible power, abundant with life giving energy, is seen on high, energising life for intelligent and industrious work on earth and shining with boundless light, and then relinquishing the day light and projecting the light far away ahead, passes on to the area of erstwhile darkness of the night. (Then night follows the day here and the day follows night there.) (Rg. 10-3-1) 
1213 :Then again, overcoming the dark passage of the night with its illumination of light and manifesting the youthful daughter of great and vast heaven bearing the light of the sun up above, the same Agni shines with heavenly light constantly for the day. (Rg. 10-3-2) 
1214 :The sun of auspicious light, dispeller of darkness of the night, has come up close at the heels of its love, the beauteous holy dawn now on the run on its own and thus Agni, prevailing with beautiful sun shine of the morning holds off the darkness for the day. (Rg. 10-3-3) 
1215 :Agni, to which mighty, potent, adorable power other than you, shall we offer our sincere homage, when and where present these words of prayer? (Rg. 8-84-5) 
1216 :And you alone will provide happy homes and peaceful establishment for all our people and bless us with vitality, power, wealth and victory in response to our prayer. (Rg. 8-84-6) 
1217 :Agni, universal fire of life, come with other fires such as the sun. Weoptto worshipyou alone, the cosmic yajamana. The yajaka people holding ladlefuls of havi would honour and celebrate you and seat you on the holy grass. (Rg. 8-60-1) 
1218 :A gni, creator of energy and power, dear as breath of life omnipresent, the ladles of ghrta feed you well in the holy fire of yajna. We honour and adore the divine fire, prime power, infallible product of cosmic energy and rising in flames in yajnas. (Rg. 8-60-2) 
1219 :Let all our songs of adoration rise fast to the refulgent and glorious A gni. Let our yajna with homage and havi move and reach the universally adored and universally honoured Agni for the sake of universal protection. (Rg. 8-71-10) 
1220 :Let our prayers reach Agni, all pervasive creator of energy, for the gift of cherished wealth and power. Agni is the immortal presence who appears among mortals in both physical and spiritual forms, universal yajaka, happiest and most blissful, arising in every home stead of the people. (Rg. 8-71-11) 
1221 :Irrepressible and indestructible, going forward in front of the people, fiery leader of the nation, instant starter, torch bearer of humanity and warrior, ever new: such is Agni, pioneer and leader. (Rg. 3-11-5) 
1222 :By virtue of the leading light of Agni, the generous man who gives in yajnic action gets his objects of desire, and from the rising flames of holy fire as by virtue of the scholar's brilliance of knowledge, he gets a haven of peace. (Rg. 3-11-7) 
1223 :Patient yet most irresistible of all the front rank people, most enlightened of the noble and generous, inviolable, Agni iswell read and most renowned leading light. (Rg. 3-11-6) 
1224 :Lord of beauty and glory, may the yajna fire with offers of oblations be auspiciousfor us. M ay our charity be auspicious. May our yajna and all other acts of kindness and love free from violence be auspicious. And may all the appreciation and praise of our acts and behaviour be auspicious and fruitful. (Rg. 8-19-19) 
1225 :Agni, leading light of life, turn the mind to gracious goodness, by which you challenge the adversary i n battl es and w i n over the forces of darkness. Reduce the many strongholds of the violent adversaries to nullity so that by your kindness and favours we may win what we desire in peace. (Rg. 8-19-20) 
1226 :Agni, lord of the knowledge of existence, creator and ruler of food, energy and wealths of life and lord of cows and sunbeams, child of omnipotence, bring us the brilliance of knowledge and great splendour of life's victories. (Rg. 1-79-4) 
1227 :Agni, that brilliant lord of light and knowledge, treasure home of wealth and joy, divine visionary of creation, adorable with holy words, lord of wealth, blazing with flames and flaming with forces, may he ever shine and shine us with knowledge. (Rg. 1-79-5) 
1228 :Agni, blazing with light and power, creating and ruling over nights, days and the dawns, lord of the mighty order of justice and dispensation, burn up the evil and the wicked. (Rg. 1-79-6) 
1229 :Adore and exalt Agni whom yajnic people serve as a friend, with havi in hand and oblations of clarified butter, and celebrate with songs of praise. (Rg. 8-74-2) 
1230 :Serve and exalt the adorable Agni, all pervasive, who rises, strengthens all divinities of nature and humanity and raises the oblations to the heavens and heightens their vitality and power. (Rg. 8-74-3) 
1231 :I glorify the lighted fire, pure and purifying power, firm and foremost in holy works of love and non-violent development. In our state of peace and comfort, we celebrate and pray to the vi brant I ight giver of gifts, universally admired, free from jealousy, poetic creator, all knowing and present in all that exists. (Rg. 6-15-7) 
1232 :Agni, life of life, light of existence, brilliant saints and sages and ordinary mortals too for ages and ages have meditated on you, light divine, with homage and self-surrender and found their haven and home in your presence, 0 lord disseminator of fragrance, receiver of homage and giver of grace, immortal, protector, adorable, ever awake, infinite, ruler and sustainer of humanity. (Rg. 6-15-8) 
1233 :Vibhusannagna ubhayah anu vrata duto devanam rajasi sam lyase. Yat te dhitim suma- tim avrnimahedlia sma nas trivaruthah sivo bhava. wise and innocent according to your eternal law, self- refulgent light giver for the brilliant and generous, you pervade heaven and earth with your saving presence. As we meditate on your holy light and vision of knowledge, in consequence by your grace be kind and good to us, 0 lord of three worlds, omnipresent, omniscient and omnificent. (Rg. 6-15-9) 
1234 :M oving and vibrant adorations of the enlightened celebrant reach you and stay by you in the movements of air in the middle regions. (Rg. 8-102-13) 
1235 :The three-quality mind of the celebrant with sattva, rajas and tamas, open and unfettered, is the seat of Agni where peace and potential for action both have their seat. (Rg. 8-102-14) 
1236 :The seat of the refulgent, generous and virile divinity, Agni, with undaunted powers of protection is auspicious and blissful, shining like an inner sun and the second inner eye with inward light and vision. (Rg. 8-102-15) 
1237 :Indra, men in general, learned experts of vision and wisdom, illustrious powers of law and order, and fighting warriors of defence and protection all together, raising a united voice of praise, prayer and appreciation, with songs of holiness and acts of piety, invoke and invite you, ancient, nearest and most excellent lord of power and lustre, to inaugurate their yajnic celebration of the soma sessi on of peaceful and exciti ng programme of development. (Rg. 8-3-7) 
1238 :I n the ecstasy of thi s soma success of achi evement through the yajnic programme, Indra augments the strength and enthusiasm of this host and master of the programme, while now as ever before, the people appropriately adore and exalt the greatness of this lord. (Rg. 8-3-8) 
1239 :Indra and Agni, the singers of hymns, pioneers of highways and celebrants honour and worship you. I choose to celebrate you for the sake of sustenance, support and energy. (Rg. 3-12-5) 
1240 :Indra and A gni, shakeup, inspire and arousewith a single clarion call the ninety fortresses yonder of the allied and supporting forces of the benevolent ruler of the republics. (Rg. 3-12-6) 
1241 :Indra and Agni, lord of power and lord of light and law, the pioneer forces of action and reflection go forward, all round, and close to the target, following the paths of truth and law of rectitude. (Swami Dayanand interprets Indra and Agni as wind and electric energy of space, and the movements of this energy in waves directed to the targets of purpose). (Rg. 3-12-7) 
1242 :Indra and Agni, your forces, strategic concentrations of the forces deployed and collective resources, are well disposed, and integrated, and your zeal for making a move is instantaneous, everything being just at hand. (Rg. 3-12-8) 
1243 :Sagdhyu su sacipata indra visvabhir utibhih. Bhagam na hi tva yasasam vasuvidam anu sura caramasi. Indra, lord of omnipotent action and infinitely various victories, with all powers, protections and inspirations, strengthen and energise us for excellent works without del ay. As the very honour, splendour and treasure-home of the universe, 0 potent and heroic lord, we live in pursuit of your glory to justify our existence and win our destiny. (Rg. 8-61-5) 
1244 :Pauro asvasya purukrd gavam asyutso deva hiranyayah. Na kir hi danarh parimarddhisat tve yad yadyami tad a bhara. You are the sole One omnipresent citizen of the universe, creator of all lands, cows, lights and knowledges of the world, maker of the motions, ambitions, advancements and achievements of nature and humanity, fountain head of universal joy, and golden refulgent generous lord supreme. N o one can ever i mpai r or obstruct your gifts to humanity. 0 lord, I pray, bring us whatever we ask for. (Rg. 8-61-6) 
1245 :Come to give gifts of wealth and honour to the devotee so that the people may be happy and prosperous. 0 lord of honour and majesty, Indra, bring us showers of the wealth of cows, lands, knowledge and culture for the seekers of light, and horses, advancement and achievement for the seekers of progress. (Rg. 8-61-7) 
1246 :Indra, you command and grant many hundreds and thousands of heaps of wealth for gift to the devotees, and as many troops of soldiers for defence and protection. We, poets of holy words of adoration, do service to I ndra, breaker of the strongholds of darkness and sing in praise of him and exhort him for the sake of protection and patronage. (Rg. 8-61-8) 
1247 :Like bowls of honey let our prime songs of adoration reach this Agni who, blissful high priest of existence, gives all the wealths and joys of the world to humanity. (Rg. 8-103-6) 
1248 :Asvam na girblii rathyam sudanavo marmrjy- ante devayavah. Ubhe toke tanaye dasma vispate parsi radho maghonam. Agni, lord of glory, ruler and sustainer of the people, generous devotees dedicated to charity and love of divinity, with voices of adoration and prayer, exalt you like the motive power of the chariot of life, and pray: Bring us the holy power and prosperity worthy of the magnificentfor our children and grand children. (Rg. 8-103-7) 
1249 :Imam me varuna srudhi havam adya ca mrdaya. Tvam avasyur a cake. Varuna, Lord Supreme of our highest choice, listen to my prayer to-day, be kind and gracious. In search of love and protection, I come and praise and pray. (Rg. 1-25-19) 
1250 :Indra, lord of power and prosperity, generous as cloud showers, by which modes of protection and promotion do you bless us with the joys we have, by which methods and graces do you bear and bring the We invoke Indra for our programmes of natural and environmental development. We invite Indra when the yajna of development is inaugurated. Lovers and admirers dedicated to him, we pray for his grace in our struggles of life, and we solicit his favour and guidance for the achievement of wealth, honour and excellence. (Rg. 8-3-5) 
1251 :Indra, by the power and abundance of his omnipotence, expands and pervades heaven and earth. Indra gives the radiance of light to the sun. AII regions of the universe and her children are sustained in life and order in Indra, and in the infinite power, presence and abundance of I ndra flow all liquid energies of life's evolution to their perfection and fulfilment. (Rg.8-3-6) 
1252 :Ay a rued harinya punano visva dvesahsi tarati sayugvabhih suro na sayugvabhih. Dhara prsthasya rocate punano aruso harih. Visva yad rupa pariyasyrkvabhih saptasyebhir rkvabhih. This Soma spirit of the fighting force of divinity, protecting and purifying by its own victorious lustre of innate powers, overcomes all forces of jealousy and enmity as the sun dispels all darkness with its own rays of light. The stream of its radiance, on top, shines beautiful and blissful. The lustrous saviour spirit which pervades all existent forms of the world, goes forward pure and purifying with seven notes of its exalting voice and seven rays of light and seven pranic energies expressive of its mighty force. (Rg. 9-111-1) 
1253 :Pracim anu pradisam yati cekitat sain rasmi- bhir yatate darsato ratho daivyo darsato rathah. Agmann ukthani paunsyendram jaitraya harsayan. Vajras ca yad bhavatho ana- pacyuta samatsvanapacyuta. Intelligent and well aware, Soma warrior goes forward in the line and to the destination in consonance and continuation of living ancient tradition of law and custom, his glorious divine chariot is directed by rays of light and vibrant enthusiasm, thusthe glorious chariot goes on. Songs of praise in honour of the brave resound, exalting Indra, the ruling soul of the order, for victory, when the ruling soul and thefighting force both become the one thunderbolt infallible in battles, verily one invincible power in battle. (Rg. 9-111-3) 
1254 :Tvam ha tyatpaninam vido vasu sam matrbhir marjayasi sva a dama rtasya dhitibhir dame. Paravato na sama tad yatra rananti dhitayah. Tridhatubliir arusibliir vayo dadhe rocamdno vayo dadhe. You win the wealth of advantage over hard bargai ners i n exchange and, i n trade and commerce, turn deficit into surplus and make it shine with native resources in your own home, yes with open, honest, yajnic transactions of law and truth as on the vedi of yajna. Songs of praise and appreciation from afar are heard where expert organisers and workers rejoice in action. Bright and brilliant Soma spirit of peace holds life and sustenance in hand by shining wealth of matter, mind and motion in open peaceable circulation, yes Soma holds life and sustenance in hand, under control, and provides it freely. (Rg. 9-111-2) 
1255 :Lord of light and life's development, give us the gift of that knowledge and intelligence which may devel op the wealth of cows and horses and create modes and means of success and prosperity. Give us that intelligence inspired with love for people so that we may live in peace and joy. (Rg. 6-53-10) 
1256 :M aruts, dynamic powers of action and generosity, know and fulfil the plan and desire of the man truly courageous and powerful, knowledgeable, cultured and graceful who honestly lives by the sweat of his brow. (Rg. 1-86-8) 
1257 :May the Vishvedevas, eminent brilliancies of humanity, children of immortality and creators of the language of immortality in knowledge, come and listen to the prayers of the seekers and be givers of bliss to us. M ay the children listen to the voices of the immortals and be givers of joy to us. (Rg. 6-52-9) 
1258 :Divine and pure heaven and earth, together in body with your innate power and potential, you shine in glory and observe the laws of eternal truth in existence. (Rg. 4-56-6) 
1259 :Ayamu te sam atasi kapota iva garbhadhim. Vacas tac cin na ohase. Indra, firmly holding the thunder-bolt in hand, like a forceful jet of water or like a flood of penetrating rays of light to shoot, breaks the cloud and releases the waters of life. Similarly, one with your lustre and valour, like a wood cutter and carver, you fell the strongholds of evi 11 i ke the trees of a forest, yes, uproot the w i eked, striking the blows as with the axe. (Rg. 1-30-4) 
1260 :Indra, celebrated inthedivinevoiceof revelation, creator and guardian of the world and its wealth, mighty lord of omnipotence, great and true is your glory, and may our praise and prayer to you be truly realised for our strength and joy of life. (Rg. 1-30-5) 
1261 :Indra, hero of a hundred great acts of yajnic creation, rise and stay high for our defence and protection in this battle of Iife. A nd we would sing your praises in prayer with joy in other battles too together with you. (Rg. 1-30-6) 
1262 :The psychic base of the devoted seeker of meditative communion is highly creative. 0 mind and senses attended with both knowledge and action of divine character, rise high and reach close to the reservoir of divine grace and win the showers of bliss. (Rg. 8-72-12) 
1263 :W hen the fount of the divine reservoir is released toward the quiet mind of the devotee, then the lord of clouds and soma fills the lotus of his heart with the honeyed ecstasy of divine grace. (Rg. 8-72-11) 
1264 :and vibrating on high, pervading all round, full of peace and joy, just an inverted well, inexhaustible, with release of showers on the down side for the celebrants. (Rg. 8-72-10) 
1265 :Let us never feel afraid, let us never tire or feel depressed under your kind care and friendship, commander of blazing lustre. Admirable is your action and prowess, mighty generous lord. We celebrate you and pray we may see that our people and our progeny be industrious and high achievers. (Rg. 8-4-7) 
1266 :The joyous world of soma in relation to the earth, you illuminate and rule with a fraction of your prowess. Whoever plays his part well and renders his share to the refulgent ruler never regrets nor displeases the ruler ever. Come fast, 0 lord, rush in and drink the soma mixed with sweets of honey and seasoned with milk. (Rg. 8-4-8) 
1267 :Ima u tva puruvaso giro vardhantu yd mama. Pavakavarnah sucayo vipascitobhi stomair anus at a. This I ndra, adored and exalted by poets and sages a thousand ways to power and glory, rises like the sea. Ever true and inviolable is he, and I celebrate his might and grandeur expanding in the yajnic programmes of the dominion of the wise. (Rg. 8-3-4) 
1268 :This entire world whether it is dynamic and progressive, or reactionary and slavish, whether it guards the wealth of life or destroys it, all this wealth, directly or indirectly, is circulating within the presence of Indra, the master, awfully armed, destroyer of destroyers, to whom it really and ultimately belongs. (Rg. 8-51-9) 
1269 :Dynamic scholars and vibrant sages offer to Indra the song of adoration replete with honey sweets and liquid power of exhortation. Let the beauty and prosperity of life increase among us, let generous and virile strength and vitality grow, and let streams of inspiring soma flow for us. (Rg. 8-51-10) 
1270 :in motion for us the flow of wealth full of lands, cows, knowledge and culture, and of horses, movement, progress and achievement. I pray bless me that I may honour and worship your pure divine presence above all, above mind and senses and above the things mind and senses are involved with. (Rg. 9-105-4) 
1271 :be, whoever is a devouring destroyer, and a double dealer. (Rg. 9-105-6) 
1272 :Anjate vyahjate sam anjate kratum rihanti madhvabhy anjate. Sindhor ucchvase pata- y ant am uksanam hiranyapavah pasum apsu grbhnate. They realise it in the vibrant soul, diversify the presence in various statements of definition and communication, and integrate the experience and the statements in the awareness of its absolute glory. They love and adore the soul of cosmic yajna and worship it with honey sweets of homage in acts of soma yajna. In these ways of awareness, thoughts, words and deeds, do lovers of the golden glory of soma realise and integrate with the all watching universal power and presence vaulti ng on top of thei r waves of consciousness with incessant showers of bliss divine. (Rg. 9-86-43) 
1273 :Vipascite pavamanaya gayata main na dhara- tyandho arsati. Ahir na jurnam ati sarpati tva- cam atyo na krldannasarad vrsa harih. Soma, foremost pioneer spirit, refulgent ruler, open to all, maker of days and nights, omnipresent in all regions of the universe, is adored and worshipped by all. Soft and sweet, gracious and iliuminativeasghrta, destroyer of darkness and suffering, blissful of sight, deep as space, riding the chariot of light, universal haven of all, moves, initiates and consecrates us for the achievement of honour, wealth and excellence. (Rg. 9-86-45) 
1274 :Agni, lord of knowledge, mighty of strength and power, kind and gracious, with all these forms of heat and energy, take on this yajnic programme of ours, fructify our words of prayer, and bless us with the delight of well-being. (Rg. 1-26-10) 
1275 :By whichever eternal and extended holy powers of cosmic yajna were the brilliant and generous powers of nature created, to the same divine powers we offer yajna, to one and all. And to the same powers is the holy material of yajna offered for all time. (Rg. 1-26-6) 
1276 :M ay the happy, charming and venerable ruler of the people, worthy of choice, be dear to us. May the venerable people who offer yajna in honour of Agni, eternal I ord of cosmi c yaj na, and the Ieader of the peopl e, be dear to us. (Rg. 1-26-7) 
1277 :For the sake of you all of humanity, we invoke and worship I ndra, the one lord ruler over the universe, and we pray He may be with us in vision in a state of absolute bliss. (Rg. 1-7-10) 
1278 :Indra, lord of the universe, light of the world, generous lord of wealth, irresistible wielder of power, generous giver of showers, grant us the yajnic prosperity of life and open the doors of freedom and salvation at the end. (Rg. 1-7-6) 
1279 :As the virile bull leads the herd it rules, so does Indra, generouslord indomitableand ruler of theworld, inspire and lead H is children to joy and freedom. (Rg. 1-7-8) 
1280 :Tvam nascitra utya vaso radhahsi coday a. Asya ray as tvam ague rathlrasi vida gadham tuce tu nah. Agni, wonderful lord of versatile action, giver of shelter and security of the home, with protection and advancement, inspire and raise our means and materials for success and achievement. 0 lord of knowledge and vision, you are the guide and pilot of the chariot and wealth and honours of this generation. Give us the message and inspiration of peace, progress and security for our children. (Rg. 6-48-9) 
1281 :Agni, lord of light and culture, you cleanse, refine and enrich our children and teenagers with all nourishments and safeguards for body, mind and soul with unfailing and unchallengeable modes and methods of education and refinement. Resist and overcome the passions and negativities which attract natural wrath and fight out impious temptations from us.(Rg.6-48-10) 
1282 :Kim it te visno paricaksi nama pra yad vavakse sipivisto asmi. Md varpo asmad apa guha etad yad anyarupah samithe babhutha. Vishnu, can that manifestive form of your presence be described or ignored? You yourself reveal in the Veda that you are self - refulgent. Pray do not hide off that form of yours from me, nor the other one which manifests in the divine wrath and punishment in the existential battle between good and evil. (Rg. 7-100-6) 
1283 :Pra tat te adya sipivista havyam aryah sahsami vayunani vidvan. Tam tva grnami tavasam ata- vyan ksayantam asya raj as ah parake. Vasat te visnavasa a kpiomi tan me jusasva sipivista havyam. Varddhantu tva sustutayo giro me yuyam pata svastibhih sada nah. Vishnu, lord omnipresent, I do honour to your presence in song and offer it to you as homage in words. 0 lord of universal light of life, pray accept this offer of homage. May my words of celebration exalt your presence in manifestation. 0 lord, 0 divinities of nature and humanity, pray protect and promote us with all means and modes of peace, prosperity and all round well being all ways all time. (Rg. 7-100-7) 
1284 :Vayu, lord omnipotent, self-refulgent and generous centre object of universal love, I come to the top of the honey sweets of yajnic creations of light and joy for the life divine, cleansed and pure as I am now. Comeforadrink of soma by the chariot and the team of horses. (Rg. 4-47-1) 
1285 :Indra and Vayu, you two love and deserve the drink of these somas distilled in yajnas. J ust as waters all together flow to the sea, so do all flows of soma and all movements of dedicated devotees end up when they join you. (Rg. 4-47-2) 
1286 :Vayu and Indra, most powerful, commander and ruler of the power and force of existence, controllers of the dynamics of energy, come hither together by the same chariot as two in one for the protection and promotion of our yajna of production, honour and When the thoughts and actions of bright celebrants invoke, invite and inspire Soma to move, initiate and bless, then the divine spirit, exalted by the songs, moves toward battles and inspires, energises and exalts their mind and courage for victory. (Rg. 9-99-2) 
1287 :Tam asya marjayamasi mado ya indrapatamah. Yam gava asabhir dadhuh pur a nunam ca surayah. That power and ecstasy of this Soma, worthiest of the soul's delight, weadoreand exalt, which thesense and mind with their perceptions and reflection receive and which, for sure, veteran sages too have experienced for times immemorial. (Rg. 9-99-3) 
1288 :That spirit of Soma, pure and purifying, the celebrants adore and exalt by songs of old in Vedic voice and, the same, thoughts and actions of veteran sages with the divine name content of the lord supplicate and glorify. (Rg. 9-99-4) 
1289 :Agni, brilliant and illuminating power and presence of yajnas from the homely agnihotra to the highest programmes of humanity, like a tempestuous horse of flying hair, we praise you and celebrate you with homage and offerings of food and oblations. (Rg. 1-27-1) 
1290 :May our children and successors, travelling far and wide with power and knowledge, be good and kind to us and give us showers of wealth and prosperity. (Rg. 1-27-2) 
1291 :M ay he, lord of light and knowledge, giver of all joys of life, protect our life, home and industry from far and near against any and every sinful person.(Rg. 1-27-3) 
1292 :Indra, 0 inspired soul, in the external conflicts of life and in the internal conflicts of mind, you are the superior over all assailants. You are the destroyer of evil and calumny, creator of goodness and eliminator of impediments. Pray drive off all evil thoughts and oppositions of life and mind. (Rg. 8-99-5) 
1293 :Anu te susmam turayantam lyatuh ksoni sisum na matara. Visvas te sprdhah snathayanta manyave vrtrarii yad indra turvasi. Just as mothers follow the desires and interests of children, so do the heaven and earth, all living beings from earth to heaven, think and act in conformity with you, evil destroying power. AII oppositions slacken and fall exhausted when you strike and destroy the demons of evil and negativity in the interest of man.(Rg.8-99-6) 
1294 :Yajna, joint creative endeavour which protects and replenishes the earth and environment, pleases and elevates Indra, the ruler, and creates a place of bliss in the light of heaven for the doer. (Rg. 8-14-5) 
1295 :When Indra, lord omnipotent and blissful, eliminates all obstructions and negativities from our paths of progress, then we see the entire space in existence shines with light and overflows with the joy of soma bliss. (Rg. 8-14-7) 
1296 :W hen the lord shakes up our psychic energies to the depths and throws out our darkness and negativities, then he sharpens our senses along with pranic energies and opens out our spiritual potential hidden in the cave of the heart. (Rg. 8-14-8) 
1297 :The ruler, warrior that hits the target, being irresistible, protector and valuer of life's joy, inviolable and unsurpassable leader in irrevocable action: such is Indra, elevated ruler. (Rg. 8-92-8) 
1298 :Indra, leader in knowledge and wisdom, pursuer of the path of rectitude, guide and lead us to ample wealth and protect us through our struggle for victory of honour and excellence. (Rg. 8-92-9) 
1299 :That grandeur and majesty of yours, that power and potential, that continuous act of divine generosity, that adamantine will and force of natural justice and dispensation of the thunderbolt which overwhelms our will and choice commands our sense of discrimination, and we glorify it, we sharpen it, we accept it with adoration. (Rg. 8-15-7) 
1300 :The light of heaven glorifies your blazing power, the earth augments your honour and fame, and the rolling floods of water and mighty mountains of majesty do awesome homage to you. (Rg. 8-15-8) 
1301 :Vishnu, cosmic dynamics of nature's expansive sustenance, M itra, loving and life giving sun, Varuna, soothing and energising oceans of the universe, and the power and force of the showers of cosmic energy all exaltyou and receive their life and exaltation from you. (Rg. 8-15-9) 
1302 :Salutations to you, Agni, refulgent lord of generosity. The people too adore and exalt you. Pray ward off and throw out the enemies and unfriendly forces by your laws and powers. (Rg. 8-75-10) 
1303 :Agni, refulgent lord, give us ample and high quality wealth for the development and expansion of our lands and cows, and let us too vastly expand and highly rise in life. (Rg. 8-75-11) 
1304 :Ma no agne maha dhane para varg bharabhrd yatha. Sain vargam sam rayim jaya. Agni, do not abandon us in this great battle of life like a tired burden bearer throwing off his burden. Instead, win holy wealth I ike the yaj aka gathering sacred grass for the vedi to perform the yajna. (Rg. 8-75-12) 
1305 :The people, in fact the entire humanity, bow in homage and surrender to this lord of passion, power and splendour just as rivers flow on down and join into the sea. (Rg. 8-6-4) 
1306 :And when thelord of might and munificencewith his thunderbolt of showers and a hundred potentials shatters the head of Vrtra, terror striking demon of darkness, drought and despair, the bolt is nothing but the blazing omnipotence of the lord. (Rg. 8-6-6) 
1307 :When Indra, lord almighty, pervades and envelops both heaven and earth in the cover of light, the light that shines is only the lord's divine splendour that blazes with glory. (Rg. 8-6-5) 
1308 :Indra is wise and noble at heart, bright and beneficent, joyous is his love, delightful and persuasive his word. Pleasing of form universally, generous and abundant as clouds of shower, come Indra, auspicious are these your carriage horses like rays of the sun, like knowledge and action of a mighty soul, and they come close, bearing your Divinity. Lead us on. Let the brave veterans of knowledge and yajnic karma, dedicated to Veda Brahma and humanity, with holy songs of divinity, invoke the most venerable and celebrated lord here on the vedi as our friend and companion. (Rg. 8-2-27) 
1309 :M ay the connoisseur of distilled soma, destroyer of darkness, dishonour and destitution, come and never be far away from us. The lord who commands a hundred forces of defence, protection and progress rules all, friends and foes. (Rg. 8-2-26) 
1310 :AII the flows of soma, joys, beauties and graces of life concentrate in you, and thence they flow forth too, Indra, lord supreme, just as all rivers flow and join in the ocean and flow forth from there. 0 lord no one can comprehend and excel you. (Rg. 8-92-22) 
1311 :and rolls in the blissful reservoirs of your divine presence. (Rg. 8-92-23) 
1312 :Indra, 0 lord of power and joy, destroyer of evil and suffering, let there be ample soma to fill the space in the womb of existence, and let the flow of soma be profuse for all the forms of existence. (Rg. 8-92-24) 
1313 :Hero of high knowledge and wide fame, create and provide for every people and offer to adorable yajnic Rudra, brilliant lord of justice and power, that wealth, honour and celebration which is magnificent and worthy of praise. (Rg. 1-27-10) 
1314 :M ay the yajnic science of fire, great, immeasurable, universal delight with banners of smoke and flame, call up and inspire us for the achievement of Intel I igential technology and creative power and progress. (Rg. 1-27-11) 
1315 :That Agni, divine protector and sustainer of humanity, destroyer of disease with rays of light, mighty brilliant, may listen to our prayers and hymns of praise like a generous man of wealth and prosperity. (Rg. 1-27-12) 
1316 :In your soma yajna in the business of the world of the lord's creation, sing together songs of homage in honour of the universally adored, ever true and eternal almighty Indra, songs which may be as pleasing to the mighty lord as to the seeker and the celebrant. (Rg. 6-45-22) 
1317 :A nd surely the lord giver of settlement and gifts of knowledge, power and speedy progress does not withhold the gifts since he closely hears the prayers of the devotee and responds. (Rg. 6-45-23) 
1318 :May the lord destroyer of evil, negativity and poverty visit the homestead of the prayerful devotee blest with lands, cows and divine knowledge and open up the flood gates of wealth, power and divine grace for us with his vision and powers. (Rg. 6-45-24) 
1319 :Vishnu created this threefold universe of matter, motion and mind in three steps of evolution through Prakriti, subtle elements and gross elements, shaped the atoms i nto form and fixed the form i n eternal space and time. (Rg. 1-22-17) 
1320 :Vishnu, universal sustainer and unchallengeable protector, fixed the order of the threefold universe of forms, comprehensible, apprehensible and spiritually attainable, and hence the forms abide in and observe the laws of their existence and function. (Rg. 1-22-18) 
1321 :W ate h th e c reati onandactions of Vishnu. Thence the souls know and observe the law and discipline of their existence. Vishnu is the friend and constant companion of the soul. (Rg. 1-22-19) 
1322 :Heroic souls of vision realise the supreme presence of Vishnu in their soul as they seethe light of the sun in heaven. (Rg. 1-22-20) 
1323 :Visionary souls, celebrants of Vishnu, ever awake, invoke, kindle and light up the spirit within and realise that supreme light of Divinity in the soul. (Rg. 1 - 22 - 21 ) 
1324 :M ay the scholars of light and vision favour and protect us with knowledge of the seven stages of creation from earth to Prakrti on top through which Vishnu, lord omnipresent, created the universe (of five elements, Virat and Prakriti). (Rg. 1-22-16) 
1325 :Mo su tva vaghatasca nare asman ni riraman. Arattad va sadhamadam na a gahiha vet sann upa srudhi. Let not your worshippers be far away from us, nor let them detain you. Come to our house of celebration from the farthest distance even, and when you are here, listen to our songs of celebration and divine adoration. (Rg. 7-32-1) 
1326 :Ime hi te brahmakrtah sute saca madhau na maksa asate. Indre kamarii jaritaro vasuyavo rathe na padam a dadhuh. W hen the celebrants have distilled and seasoned the soma of homage and worship for Indra, ruler of the social order of governance, they sit together like bees clustering round honey. The celebrants dedicated to the honour and prosperity of the ruling order place their trust and faith in Indra, the ruler and the law of governance, like travellers who place their foot on the step and ride the chariotto reach their goal. (Rg.7-32-2) 
1327 :Eternal and adorable song of divine praise has been presented. Chant that for Indra, the divine soul. Sing the grand old hymns of divine law and glorify the lord. Inspire and augment the mind and soul of the celebrant. (Rg. 8-52-9) 
1328 :Sam indro rayo brhatir adhunuta sam ksoni sam u suryam. Sam sukrasah sucayah sain gavasirah soma indram amandisuh. Letlndra, divine soul, chant and liberate the grand abundance of spontaneous divine hymns in honour of Indra, let the earth and heaven resound, let the hymns reach the sun. Let the pure, powerful and sanctified soma abundance of divine celebration please Indra, lord omnipotent and omnificent. (Rg. 8-52-10) 
1329 :Indray a soma patave vrtraghne pari sicyase. Nare ca daksinavate viraya sadanasade. Comefriends, all of us and all thewiseand brave, let us reach that Soma spirit of light and grace and achi eve the spi rit as a prize and treasure home of peace, fragrance and life's victory. (Rg. 9-98-12) 
1330 :Ten psychic powerswith the best of their potential adore and exalt that dear divinity, omniscience itself, who, omnipresent, pervades and rejoices with all divinities of the world with divine ecstasy. (Rg.9-98-7) 
1331 :Indra, lord ruler, of the world, who can assail that mortal who wholly lives under the shade and shelter of your protection ? 0 lord of the wealth and power of existence, whoever reposes his faith and dynamism in you as the sole saviour and pilot while he is in action receives his share of victory in the light of divinity. (Rg. 7-32-14) 
1332 :And 0 high priest of the creative yajna of love and non-violence, offer the most delightful and ever exhilarating of honey sweets of the soma of faith and devotion to I ndra, since thus is how the mighty hero is served and worshipped. (Rg. 8-24-16) 
1333 :Indra, glorious lord president of the moving worlds of existence, no one ever by might or by commanding adoration has been ableto equal, much less excel, the prime worship offered to you. (Rg. 8-24-17) 
1334 :Praise the self-refulgent lord giver of heavenly bliss whom the divinities of light and enlightenment hold and reflect in all his glory, A gni, the lord adorable, all pervasive yet uninvolved, whom the noble and learned people perceive, realise and worship as the one worthy of worship for the communication of knowledge and fragrances to the divinities of nature and humanity. (Rg. 8-19-1) 
1335 :Like a virile war horse in victorious battle, Soma radiates across the fine fluctuations of senses, ecstatic, flowing in exuberant streams, when it is impelled and realised by the wise, vibrant Vedic sages in meditation. (Rg. 9-107-11) 
1336 :Vayam enam ida hyopipemeha vajrinam. Tasmd u adya savane sutam bhara nunam bhusata srute. H ere today as before we have regaled this lord of the thunderbolt. For him, again, now, all of one mind, bear and bring the distilled soma of homage, and worship, him who would, for certain for joy of the song, grace the celebrants. (Rg. 8-66-7) 
1337 :The wolf, its counterforce elephant, and the thief all haveto accept and follow the laws of this lord Indra. May he, loving and cherishing this our song of adoration, listen and come with gifts of clear and un- illusive intelligence and understanding. (Rg. 8-66-8) 
1338 :Indra and Agni, you are the light and fire of heaven and you shine all round in the battles of life. A nd that brilliance proclaims your power and splendour. (Rg. 3-12-9) 
1339 :Indra and Agni, lord of power and lord of light and law, the pioneer forces of action and reflection go forward, all round, and close to the target, following the paths of truth and law of rectitude. (Swami Dayananda interprets Indra and A gni as wind and electric energy of space, and the movements of this energy in waves directed to the targets of purpose). (Rg. 3-12-7) 
1340 :Indra and Agni, your forces, strategic concentrations of the forces deployed and collective resources, are well disposed, and integrated, and your zeal for making a move is instantaneous, everything being just at hand. (Rg.3-12-8) 
1341 :Who would for certain know Indrain this created world of beauty and glory, how much power and force hewieldswhilehe rules and sustainsit, Indrawho wears the helmet and breaks down the strongholds of negativities with his lustrous might, the lord who shares and enjoys the soma of his own creation? (Rg. 8-33-7) 
1342 :Indra is generously giving, preventive, counteractive and invincible like a lion, and holds and rules the world of immense variety in motion. 0 lord of grandeur and majesty, as you move around everywhere by your might and lustre, pray come, bless our yajna and taste the soma of our creation. N o one can restrain you, no one counter your will. (Rg. 8-33-8) 
1343 :Indra who is blazing strong, uncountered and irresistible, constant and unshakable, is ever in perfect harness for the human's battle of existence, and if he hears the call of the celebrant, the lord of might and majesty never forsakes him, he comes, he saves, he blesses. (Rg. 8-33-9) 
1344 :Streams of bright energising soma flow, pure and purifying, among the songs of universal poetry of divinity. (Rg. 9-63-25) 
1345 :Pure and purifying Somas, evolutionary powers of nature, divinity and humanity, creative, protective and defensive, are created from the regions of light above, the middle regions and the earth and, on top of the course of evolution and progress, they remain ever active for life in the service of divinity. (Rg. 9-63-27) 
1346 :Pure and purifying, instant and effective, bright and blazing streams of soma like warriors of natureflow and advance in action, creating peace and plenty for life, dispelling and eliminating all jealous and destructive forces from society. (Rg. 9-63-26) 
1347 :I invoke and invite Indra, commander of the forces, and Agni, leader of the enlightened, both promoters of knowledge, destroyers of evil, victorious, unconquered, winners of the highest order of prizes. (Rg. 3-12-4) 
1348 :Indra and A gni, the singers of hymns, pioneers of highways and celebrants honour and worship you. I choose to celebrate you for the sake of sustenance, support and energy. (Rg. 3-12-5) 
1349 :I ndra and A gni, shake up, inspire and arousewith a single clarion call the ninety fortresses yonder of the allied and supporting forces of the benevolent ruler of the republics. (Rg. 3-12-6) 
1350 :Agni, blazing light of life, lord of bliss and beatific vision, source giver of the power of action and forbearance, blest with the food of life and light of the spirit, we sing songs of adoration and send up our words of gratitude to you. (Rg. 6-16-37) 
1351 :Agni, lord of bliss and eternal protection, just as a person runs to the shade for relief from the blazing sun, so may we, shining as pure gold, rise and come to your presence, the bl issful shade of divinity, our ultimate haven and home. (Rg. 6-16-38) 
1352 :Agni, lord protector of life, destroyer of killer arrows I ike a fierce warrior, burning off negativities like the fierce rays of the sun, you destroy the strongholds of the enemies of life. (Rg. 6-16-39) 
1353 :We adore, exalt and worship Agni, eternal, refulgent, light of yajna, leading life and energy of the world, protector and sustainer of truth and law. (Atharva 6, 36,1) 
1354 :Agni, is co-existent and simultaneously expansive with this cosmic yajna of creation, traversing heaven and earth in space and, controlling the world of existence, initiates and furthers the cycle of seasons. Agni, favourite love adored of all that was and is and shall be, rules and shines self-refulgent in all the lovely worlds of earth, heaven and the firmament. Agni, omniscient visionary of existence, gracious and refulgent in self-identity by virtue of ancient and eternal light of knowledge and age-old songs of the poet, is exalted along with the celebrant. (Rg. 8-44-12) 
1355 :In this noble yajna of love free from violence, I invoke and celebrate the unfailing master and protector of energy, blazing with holy light and fire of purity. (Rg. 8-44-13) 
1356 :Agni, greatest friend of humanity, with pure and purifying flames of fire, you sit on our holy seats of grass on the vedi alongwith the divinities. (All our senses and mind are suffused with the presence of divinity.) (Rg. 8-44-14) 
1357 :By this power and valour of yours you eliminate the negative forces. I n this battle of the body chariot on hand in this life, we adore you with a fearless heart, you being the protector and guide. (Rg. 9-53-2) 
1358 :The rules and laws of this mighty creative and dynamic power no one can resist with his adverse force. 0 Soma, whoever opposes you, break open and destroy. (Rg. 9-53-3) 
1359 :That Soma, giver of showers of sweetness and joy, lord of peace and power, destroyer of suffering, energising and flowing in streams of the universal dynamics of existence, people admire and adore, for the joy and ecstasy of Indra, the living soul.(Rg.9-53-4) 
1360 :Indra, lord of honour and excellence, come by the rays of light, beautiful and colourful as the feathers of the peacock. May none, as fowlers ensnare birds, catch you. Outskirt the fowlers as a rainbow and come. (Rg. 3-45-1) 
1361 :I ndra is the breaker of the clouds. H e shatters the caverns of the demons, routs the cities of sin and releases the flow of waters. Sitting firm in the middle of the chariot behind the horses in the uproar like the sun on the back of the rays, he breaks even the unbreakables. (Rg.3-45-2) 
1362 :Indra, lord of life, power and prosperity, you promote and overfill the yajna and bless the yajamana like the deep sea and protect the earths, cows and the grass for them. Asa good cowherd protects and feeds the cows and guards the fodder for the cows, so do you, 0 man, protect and promote the yajna. And as the cows gain the food, and as the rivers and rivulets reach the sea for self-fulfilment, so would you enjoy the delicacies of life and reach the Lord, Indra, for self-fulfilment. (Rg. 3-45-3) 
1363 :J ust as a thirsty stag in the desert rushes to a pool full of water so, 0 friend in family of the wise, come morning, come evening, come fast and drink the soma of love and reverence in joy. (Rg. 8-4-3) 
1364 :Indra, lord of power and glory, may these soma drinks exhilarate you for the bestowal of wealth and honour upon the dedicated lover of the soma of honour and enlightenment. Having won over the soma of victory prize in the contests of competing parties, you drank of the soma of ecstasy of the highest order and for that reason you command the courage and confidence of the victor. (Rg. 8-4-4) 
1365 :Anga, dear friend, Indra, dear and saviour, giver of joy, omnipotent lord, self-refulgent and omniscient, reveal the truth for mortal humanity. Lord of universal wealth, none other than you is the giver of peace and bliss. I speak the very word of yours in covenant. (Rg. 1-84-19) 
1366 :Md te radhahsi md ta utayo vasosman kada cana dabhan. Visva ca na upamimihi manusa vasuni carsanibhya a. Indra, universal shelter of the world, may all your blessings of wealth and modes of protection never forsake us. Loving father of humanity, grant us all the wealth of knowledge and bliss here and hereafter for all the people of the world. (Rg. 1-84-20) 
1367 :That joyous dawn, pioneer of the sun, harbinger of the new day, shining at the departure of her sister, the night, rises to view every morning as the daughter of heaven, arousing the world to fresh life. (Rg.4-52-1) 
1368 :Like a graceful mare, crimson red, wondrous bright, mother pioneer of sunrays, shower of nature's light and bliss, the dawn is a friend of the A shvins, the sun and moon. (Rg. 4-52-2) 
1369 :This glorious dawn, darling of the sun, shines forth from heaven and proclaims the day. Ashvins, harbingers of this glory, I admire you immensely - infinitely. (Rg.1-46-1) 
1370 :Ashvins, harbingers of the dawn, wonder-workers are they. Born of the oceans of space, they create the seas of morning mist. Faster than the mind, they bring wealths of the world. With intelligence and inspiration, they reveal the treasures of theVasus, they are brilliant, generous, divine. (Rg. 1-46-2) 
1371 :Ashvins, harbingers of light, knowledge and wealth across the Vasus, scientists and technologists, veterans of vision and wisdom celebrate your achievement when your chariotflies like a bird into the ancient sky over the heavens. (Rg. 1-46-3) 
1372 :Generous scientists of fire and waters, Ashvins, expert technologists working together with equal cooperative mind, bring hither before us a chariot sensitive in reception and communication of signals, golden in quality and extremely fast in motion anywhere on earth, over water and in the sky. (Rg. 1-92-16) 
1373 :Let the Ashvins, people of divine nature, scientists and technologists, generous experts of fire and water, water and air, creators of comfort and joy, working on the golden sunbeams of the morning dawn, create and bring us energy and vitality for the health, vitality and joy of humanity. (Rg. 1-92-18) 
1374 :Ashvins, scientist and technologist of fire and water, both of you thus from the sun create the mantra, light and energy and bring it for us and the people for common use. (Rg. 1-92-17) 
1375 :Agni is that power and presence of energy, I believe, which pervades everything and in which and by which all things abide and function. The cows abide in it, move by it and end up into it. Horses abide in it, move by it and end i nto it. So do al I fast movi ng streams and objects, permanent forms, and all forms of energy moveby itand retireinto it. 0 scholar of Agni, universal energy, produce and bring up food and energy for the celebrants and supplicants for Agni. This energy is originally set in motion by Agni, the Cosmic omnipotent Spirit. (In the mantra agni is described as astam, i.e., set into motion.) (Rg.5-6-1) 
1376 :Agni, light and energy of existence, alone provi des fast modes of transport for the peopl e. Studi ed and developed for wealth, A gni provides automatic and self-sustaining energy for the people. 0 scholar scientist, create and bring choice foods and energies for the celebrants and supplicants. (Rg. 5-6-3) 
1377 :So agnir yo vasurgrne sam yam ay anti dhena- vah. Sam arvanto raghudruvah sam sujatasah suraya isaiii stotrbhya a bhara. That is Agni which is the abiding power, pervasive and moving force, and that is what I study and celebrate. The cows and horses, stars and planets and the rays of light, and sound and word come from, move by and go unto it, from which and into which and by which the slow moving ones move and function; and by which and toward which brave and eminent scholars rise to fame and create and produce the wealth of food and energy for the celebrants and supplicants. (Rg. 5-6-2) 
1378 :splendour, arouse us and enlighten us today for the achievement of grandeur, wealth and excellence of life as you have been the giver of enlightenment and generosity ever before, 0 majesty of renown, symbol of life's extension, nobly born, commander of the nation's power, achievement and love of noble truth. (Rg. 5- 79-1) 
1379 :(Swami Dayananda interprets this mantra as an address to the lady of the house.) 
1380 :Daughter of the light of heaven, lady of justice and moral guidancewho ride a chariot of pure brilliance, as you have shone before, so may you ever shine now and after in future, 0 lady, forbearing and challenging, renowned for truth and righteousness, extensive, nobly born and blest with prosperity, achievement and discrimination between truth and untruth of thought and speech. (Rg. 5-79-2) 
1381 :May she, daughter of the light of heaven, harbinger of all wealth, establish us today in the light of life. She is most forbearing, dedicated to truth and prosperity, lovable, nobly born, the enlightened lady of knowledge and eternal truth who herself shines in splendour. (Rg. 5-79-3) 
1382 :Ashvins, leading lights of humanity, the celebrant visionary of life's reality and mantric meaning, adores your achievement in befitting words of song in response to the beauty of your dearest chariot which is the carrier and harbinger of showers of wealth and well being. 0 creators and makers of the sweets of existence, the celebrant prays: Listen to my song of adoration and accept the invitation to live and create the joy of life. (Rg.5-75-1) 
1383 :Ashvins, leading lights of life in existence, destroyers of suffering, harbingers of peace and prosperity, creators of honey sweets, listen to my prayer: Come over regions of earth across the spaces, travelling by golden chariots over golden highways, navigating by rivers and oceans, so that I may cross all hurdles of existence and live as the immortal that I am. (Rg. 5-75-2) 
1384 :Ashvins, come you both to us, bearing jewel wealths of life; come, 0 Rudras, dispensers of justice and punishment, travelling by golden chariot over golden highways, loving and listening partners, givers of food, energy and speedy progress, creators of the sweets of life, come in response to our invocation and listen to our prayer. (Rg. 5-75-3) 
1385 :Agni is seen and known while rising by the burning samidhas lighted by theyajakasatdawn coming up like a cow early in the morning, and the flames, like branches of a mighty tree, rise brilliantly and touch the sky where there is no pain, no darkness. (Rg. 5-1-1) 
1386 :Theyajaka Agni, good at heart, is seen to invoke the divinities and noble sages to theyajna and rises high while the fire keeps burning and rising. The light of the burning fire is seen as a blissful divine power and then the great refulgent sun rises from the night's darkness. (Rg. 5-1-2) 
1387 :When the pure and lustrous fire of yajna, as the sun, rises with its pure bright flames and takes over the reins of the conduct of the yajnic world around, then the invigorating and powerful dakshina offering is made with the ladles, the flames of fire rise high, and the fire higher and higher up voraciously consumes the offering. (Rg. 5-1-3) 
1388 :Here comes this dawn, light of lights, supreme, wonderful, bright and enlightening, rising and expandi ng. J ust as the night comes over for regeneration of the sun, so does it uncover the womb of darkness for the coming of dawn. (Rg. 1-113-1) 
1389 :The bright dawn comes shining with light, bearing the bright sun new born. The dark night leaves its regions open for the light. Both, like sisters of the same one brother, immortal, assume their own form of light, one bright, the other covered and both come in succession, each retiring and succeeding the other. (Rg. 1-113-2) 
1390 :One and the same is the path of the two sisters, which is space, endless and infinite, existentially speaking, which they follow one after the other as ordained by the Divine. They neither overlap, nor encroach, nor clash, nor stand still for a moment. Fixed and firm, each on its own, and of harmonious nature are they, although the night and the dawn are of different forms which are apparently contradictory as light and darkness. (Rg. 1-113-3) 
1391 :The holy fire of the sun shines here while the splendour of the dawn radiates as advance forces of the solar fire, and the holy voices of the sages arise in adoration. 0 Ashvins, vitalities of divinity, reach here by chariot of the dawn and join the rising fire of the house-hold yajna of noble men and women.(Rg.5-76-1) 
1392 :Ashvins, divinities of nature and humanity, most auspicious harbingers of peace and joy, invoked and invited to the yajna here, celebrated and adored, coming at the fastest, almost instantly reaching with protection and promotion at the rise of the day, you do not destroy, nor restrict, nor confine what has been refined, seasoned and sanctified by yajna. In fact, you bring safety and security against adversity and self-betrayal for the generous yajamana at his closest. (Rg. 5-76-2) 
1393 :And this exuberance of yajnic celebration and joy is not confined to the present moment only, it extends over days and nights. ComeAshvins, divinities of nature and nobilities of men and women, come at the rise of dawn, at mid day when the sun is risen up on high, in the evening when the cows come home. Come all day and night with your gifts of safety and security, peace and joy. (Rg. 5-76-3) 
1394 :The lights of the dawn over there in the eastern half of the sky over earth reveal the sun and proclaim the day. Like resolute warriors burnishing their swords, the flames of the dawn, shining scarlet red, move forward with the rising sun bringing a fresh breath of life for humanity, like mother cows. (Rg. 1-92-1) 
1395 :U p rise the red flames of the dawn, naturally and spontaneously like willing red horses yoked to the chariot. The ruddy lights of the dawn awakening humanity to their daily chores as before proclaim the rise of the brilliant sun in obedience to his command. (Rg. 1-92-2) 
1396 :The lights of the dawn, I ike blessed women expert in their noble work, serve and illumine from afar with equal brilliance various regions of the world, bearing vital food and rejuvenating energy for the pious and generous yajamana dedicated to the creative service of life and nature everywhere every day. (Rg. 1-92-3) 
1397 :The fire of Agni awakes and stirs the world with life afresh. The sun is on the rise over the earth. The great and golden dawn wrapt in beauty waxes on the horizon with the splendour of her glory. The Ashvins, harbingers of new light and knowledge, harness their chariot for the daily round. And the generous lord of light and life, Savita, in his own gracious way, showers and sanctifies the moving world with sunlight and new inspiration for action. (Rg. 1-157-1) 
1398 :Yad yuhjathe vrsanam asvina ratham ghrtena no madhuna ksatram uksatam. Asmakam brahma prtanasu jinvatam vayam dhana suras at a bhajemahi. Ashvins, harbingers of new light and life, chariot leaders of the world, you harness and ride your chariot of might and victory and spri nkl e and i nspi re the K shatra order of our defence and governance with exciting spirit of life and honey sweets of power and prosperity. In our struggle for the joy of life, inspire and strengthen our Brahma system of research and education with new knowledge and self-confidence. We pray, may we achieve the prize of success and victory in our battles of the brave. (Rg. 1-157-2) 
1399 :Here, may the three engined, three staged, honey carri er, superfast chari ot of the A shvi ns come, the chari ot all-acciaimed, mighty, laden with wealth and splendours of the world, and may that chariot, we pray, bring us peace, prosperity and well-being for our humans and for our animal world. (Rg. 1-157-3) 
1400 :Soma, spirit of joy, destroyer of suffering, watching all human activity, flows forth for its dear favourites, striking its arms against adverse forces. (Rg. 9-57-2) 
1401 :Soma, adored and glorified by people, as a self- controlled, powerful and brilliant ruler ever awake and unfailing power, pervades in the human common-wealth and the entire world of sustenance. (Rg. 9-57-3) 
1402 :Soma, lord of wealth, beauty and excellence, ever pure and sanctifying, may, we pray, bring us all the wealth, honour and fame of life on earth and the light and magnificence of heaven. (Rg. 9-57-4) 
1403 :In character with its self-refulgence, and glorifying its divine powers in nature and humanity, the streams of this mighty virile Soma, pure and immaculate, flow forth with the light and lustre of its omnipotence. (Rg. 9-29-1) 
1404 :Sages embellish and exalt the might of the omniscient and omnipotent Soma, poets and artists, with the language of their art, celebrate the divine light thus emerging and rising more and more admirable. (Rg. 9-29-2) 
1405 :This lord Infinite and Absolute, adored every season, beneficent all seasons, Indra, most potent, I hear by name, I adore, I worship. Like streams of water flowing by their natural course, 0 lord munificent, Indra, let your gifts of wealth, honour and excellence flow free for humanity. I ndra, bravest of the brave, protector of the good and true, just as we turn the chariot, so do we draw your attention and pray you turn to us and come for our protection, welfare and enlightenment, lord of infinite action and conqueror of enemies. (Rg. 8-68-1) 
1406 :Lord omnipotent of infinite action, infinitely helpful, omniscient, with your cosmic power and grandeur you pervade the whole universe. (Rg. 8-68-2) 
1407 :Indra who are infinitely great by virtue of your omnipotence, your hands wield the thunderbolt of justiceand golden gracewhich reaches everywhere over Agni, who has illuminated the celestial city of this imperishable soul, who is fast as the winds of space and faster than sunbeams, is the visionary creator of the worlds of eternity, blazing as the very soul of a thousand suns. (Rg. 1-149-3) 
1408 :Twice born and born of two, akasha and vayu, manifesting in universal nature and in every distinct f orm of nature, i 11 umi nati ng three I i ghts, f i re of the earth, lightning of the skies and lights of heaven, vitalising all the worlds of the universe, Agni abides all round everywhere. Worthiest universal yajaka, holding the worlds unto itself, itabides coexistent with the universal liquid energy of the cosmos. (Rg.1-149-4) 
1409 :Ay am sa hota yo dvijanma visva dadhe varyani sravasya. Martto yo asmai sutuko dadasa. Such is this A gni, creative lord of cosmic yajna, wielder of the worlds, born of two and twice born, who holds the choicest foods, energies and honours of the universe. A nd the man who, self-sacrificing, twice born of natural mother and mother Sarasvati, blest with the richest gifts of food, energy and honour, with a noble family gives in homage and surrender to this A gni, he is the real man. (Rg. 1-149-5) 
1410 :Ague tarn adyasvam na stomaih krtum na bhadram hrdisprsam. Rdhyama ta ohaih. A gni, mighty power of light and motion, with songs of praise and prayer and with holy acts of service offered in homage to you today, we augment, celebrate and glorify you, fast as nature's waves of energy, bright as intelligence and blissful as yajna, and dear as love closest to the heart. (Rg. 4-10-1) 
1411 :And now Agni, 0 light and ruler of the world, be the rider and commander of the chariot of the plan and programme of our creative and developmental yajna of the human nation, a yajna which is blissfully fruitful, expertly organised and sophisticated, truthfully in consonance with the laws of nature and the environment and positively good, great and far reaching in consequence for life. (Rg. 4-10-2) 
1412 :Agni, light and life of the world, majestic as the sun's refulgent glory, good and loving at heart, in response to these our songs of praise and prayer and acts of piety, come straight and bless us with all your forces of protection and promotion and give us, lead us to, the success of our heart's desire. (Rg. 4-10-3) 
1413 :Agni, lord of life, blazing as the sun, immortal, omniscient of things born, for the man of charity who has surrendered himself to you, you bring today wonderful wealth of the dawn, and let the yogis and blessings of nature awake at the dawn. (Rg. 1-44-1) 
1414 :Agni, ruling lord of light and the world, invoked and lighted, you are the blazing catalyst and carrier of yajnic materials offered and fragrances received. You are the leadi ng chariothero of theworld's yajnic acts of love and creation. Friend of the A shvi ns, sun and moon, water and air, working with the complementary powers of nature, friend and companion of ours too, bring us noble strength and valour, bless us with universal honour and fame. (Rg. 1-44-2) 
1415 :Old age consumes even the youthful man of versatile action whom many fear to face in battle and flee. Look at the inscrutable power of the lord divine by whose inevitable law of mutability the man who was living yesterday is dead today, and the one that dies today would be living to tomorrow. (Rg. 10-55-5) 
1416 :Sdkmand sdko arunah suparna a yo mahah surah sandd anidah. Yac ciketa satyam ittan na mogham vasu spdrham uta jetota data. He is Almighty by might supreme, blazing lustrous, high flying and all caring, great, brave, eternally unbound by space. What he knows is truth inviolable, never infructuous, he is universal haven, lovable, all conqueror, all giving. (Rg. 10-55-6) 
1417 :With these potent and positive waves of natural energy, the virile Indra, wielder of thunderbolt, assumes those powers for breaking the clouds of darkness and want by which he brings about the showers of rain for the world of existence, which powers too for bringing about the showers of positive action and creativity arise from the grandeur of the omnipotent original doer of cosmic karma. (Rg. 10-55-7) 
1418 :Mitra, men of universal love, Aryama, men of adventure on the paths of rectitude, and Varuna, men of judgement and right choice, continuously drink of this soma created and sanctified by the procreative power of d i v i n i ty perv ad i n g i n th e th ree reg i o n s of th e u n i v erse, heaven, earth and the sky. (Rg. 8-94-5) 
1419 :And surely the delight and exhilaration of this soma, Indra, the soul, inspirited with the power of brilliance and awareness, like a yajaka at dawn, experiences, and celebrates the ecstasy in dance and song. (Rg. 8-94-6) 
1420 :Banmahah asi surya bad dditya mahah asi. Mahaste sato mahima panistama mahna dev a mahah asi. Indra, hero of a hundred noble actions, greatest destroyer of darkness who know both the way of knowledge and the way of karma for the good life, come to taste our soma of homage prepared by us with our heart and soul for you. (Rg. 8-93-32) 
1421 :you are theexperiencer of the joyous soma pleasures of I if e. R i se and enj oy the know I edge and w i sdom col I ected and offered by the senses, mind and intelligence. (Rg. 8-93-33) 
1422 :Bear and bring homage, assistance and cooperation and offer positive thoughts and advice to Indra, your leader and ruler. Great is he, promoter of great people and the common wealth, and a leader wideawake with deep and distant foresight. 0 leader and ruler of the land, be good to the settled ancient people and take care of the farming communities and other prof essi onal s so that al I feel happy and f ulf i 11 ed w i thout frustration. (Rg. 7-31-10) 
1423 :Uruvyacase mahine suvrktim indr ay a brahma janayanta viprah. Tasya vratani na minanti dhirah. To the great Indra, the ruler widely perceptive and all aware, vibrant people of the land, the learned and the wi se w i th a sense of dynami sm, al I offer homage, rooting out dead wood, planting new saplings, generating new forms of sustenance and energy, and creating new forms of appreciating and realising the eternal spirit. And they, people of constancy and settled mind, never viol ate the laws and discipline of the lord's Eternal Law. (Rg. 7-31-11) 
1424 :All voices of the people, all sessions of yajnic programmes of action, uphold and support only the brilliant ruler, Indra of constant vision and passion, in order to maintain the social order of governance without obstruction. 0 friends and citizens of the land, exhort your people in support of Indra, leader of the dynamic nation of humanity. (Rg. 7-31-12) 
1425 :Indra, lord ruler of the world, giver of wealth and excellence, as much as you grant, so much I wish I should control and rule. I would hold it only to support the devotees of divinity and would not spend it away for those who indulge in sin and evil. (Rg. 7-32-18) 
1426 :Sikseyam in mahayate dive-dive raya a kuhacid vide. Na hi tvad anyan maghavan na apyam vasyo asti pita ca na. Every day I would wish to give wealth and support for the person who seeks to rise for enlightenment wherever he be. 0 lord of wealth, power and honour, there is none other than you worthy of love and attainment as our own, as father indeed. (Rg. 7-32-19) 
1427 :Listen to the cloud shower of exhortation from the vi brant sage, j oyous parti ci pant i n the congregati on, know the thought and will of the wise scholar in adoration of your honour, and honour these prayers, most sincere and intimate, in action. (Rg. 7-22-4) 
1428 :Na te giro api mrsye turasya na sustutim asur- yasya vidvan. Sada te nama svayaso vivakmi. Never shall I forget your words, instant and mighty of action as you are, nor shall I, knowing your power and potential, ever neglect your appreciation and adoration. I value and appreciate the significance of your name and your innate honour and excellence. (Rg. 7-22-5) 
1429 :ruling lord Indra for his mighty force and front rank chariot. He, destroyer of darkness and evil, inspires us in our battles of life at the closest and enlightens us in our struggle for universal freedom. Let the strings of the alien enemy bows be snapped by the strike of the forces of Indra. (Rg. 10-133-1) 
1430 :Indra, you release the floods of rivers to flow down on the earth. You destroy the demon of darkness, evil, want and ignorance. You are born without an equal, adversary and enemy, and you promote the choicest wealth and excellence of the world. Such as you are we love and embrace you as our closest loving friend and companion. Letthealien stringsof the enemy bowssnap upon their bows. (Rg. 10-133-2) 
1431 :Indra, may the facts and forces of enmity, adversity and ungenerosity be eliminated from life and the world. May all our thoughts and actions be inspired by love and generosity. You strike the thunderbolt of justice and punishment upon the enemy who wants to destroy us or frustrate our love and generosity. M ay your grace and generosity bring us wealth, honour and excellence of life. Let the strings of enemy bows snap by the tension of their own negativities. (Rg. 10-133-3) 
1432 :I ndra, master and commander of dynamic forces, may the celebrant of the brilliant, bountiful and renowned like you be brilliant, prosperous and celebrated. That is but natural. (Rg. 8-2-13) 
1433 :Indra, lord of power and piety, the man attached to divinity in faith and opposed to doubt and disloyalty knows the words of praise spoken by a man of doubtful faith as much as he knows the songs of adoration sung by a man of faith (and makes a distinction between the two). (Rg. 8-2-14) 
1434 :Indra, lord of refulgent power, give us not away to the scornful abuser nor to the wild tyrant. With your laws and powers, pray discipline, rule, instruct and enlighten us. (Rg. 8-2-15) 
1435 :Indra, ruler of the world, come with all your powers and perceptions to the sage's adoration and instruction, and from the light and exhortation of the elevating sage, 0 seeker of enlightenment, go and rise to the heights of divinity. (Rg. 8-34-1) 
1436 :Here the very edge and foundation of these sages of knowledge and wisdom would shake you and reveal you to yourself as thunder shakes the earth and I i ghtni ng lights it up all over. A nd then from the light and thunder of these commanders you would rise, liberated, to your own heights of heaven, 0 lover and ruler of the light of day. (Rg. 8-34-3) 
1437 :The maker of soma, creator of the joy of a new life, would welcomeyou herewith a loud proclamation and exalt you with the voice of thunder, and from the light and power of the sage's revelation, 0 lover of light, go and rise to your own essential heaven of freedom. (Rg. 8-34-2) 
1438 :Your creative spirits of imagination, powerful and most ecstatic, give birth to the vibrant poet creator, the karma yogi of imagination. (Rg. 9-67-18) 
1439 :Flowing and creating, Soma streams rush forward like victor chariots in the service of divinity.(Rg. 9-67-17) 
1440 :I worship, serve and meditate on Agni, lord of light and knowledge, spirit of life and heat and inspiration of noble action, yajaka, generous giver, treasure of wealth and universal shelter, inspirer and creator of courage and courageous action like the sun, omniscient lord of all that is born in existence, master of knowledge as the supreme scholar of the Veda, organiser of yajna with love and non-violence with divine knowledge and awareness, refulgent with heavenly light and power, loving and consuming with flames of fire and light the blaze of the purest and most powerful ghrta offered into the fire of yajna, physical, mental and spiritual all. 1 (Rg.1-127-1) 
1441 :Agni, lord most worshipful, we the performers of this yajnic assembly, with all our heart and mind, together with all the saints and scholars with their earnest desire, invoke and invite you, wisest and senior-most of the scholar visionaries of Divinity, pure and immaculate, brilliant as the sun with your reach into the light of heaven, high-priest of humanity, lord of light knowledge, generous as rain showers, whom all these people accept, respect and approach with their desire and prayer for protection and self-fulfilment. (Rg. 1-127-2) 
1442 :He surely rises to shine very brilliantly with his own splendid valour and honourwho, liketheaxewhich cuts down the trees, mows down the enemies, in whose presence even the strong and firm like the dense forest burst asunder into pieces, and who, commanding brave warriors, dominates and directs the enemies and, like a mighty wielder of the bow and arrow, never wavers but advances in battle against the enemy forces. (Rg. 1- 127-3) 
1443 :Agni, leading light of life, great is your vigour, power and felicity, shining, inspiring and incessantly flowing. 0 refulgent lord, your flames rise high and blaze fiercely. Light and fire of Infinity, omniscient poet and creator, by your power, potential and abundance, you bear and bring admirable food, energy and fulfilment with the sense of victory for the generous giver and selfless yajaka. (Rg. 10-140-1) 
1444 :Lord of flames of purity, master of immaculate light and power absol utel y free from w ant and weakness, you risewith self-refulgence and, just as the son closely abides by the parents, serves and protects them, so do you pervade, sustain and protect the heaven and earth. (Rg. 10-140-2) 
1445 :world of existence, rise and rejoice as well as exhilarate us, with hymns and noble thoughts and actions as you are invoked and kindled inthevedi and in the heart and soul. Faithful celebrants bring you food in homage, and in you they vest thei r desires and aspi rations of various forms and wondrous efficacy arisen from love of the heart and soul. (Rg. 10-140-3) 
1446 :Immortal Agni, waxing and exalting with all living beings, develop and expand the wealth and excellence of life for us. Of noble and gracious form as you are and shine and rule as you do, join us with yajnic action and bless us with abundant fruit of success and victory. (Rg. 10-140-4) 
1447 :Agni, lord, spirit, and power of the light and fire of life, we celebrate and adore you, inspirer, impeller and promoter of holy yajna of love and non-violence, omniscient treasure giver and controller of the great world's wealth, who bear and bring us abundant gifts of beauty and splendour and the good fortune of life, high energy and food, plenty and prosperity, indeed all wealth, honour and excellence of life. (Rg. 10-140-5) 
1448 :Men, first of all since earliest times, worship, adore and inculcate you, Agni, omniscient lord of life, yajna and the law of life, great and glorious, most gracious presence of the world, for the sake of peace, pleasure and prosperity for the good life. 0 lord of life and grace, mortals singly and in couples and family with holy words celebrate and exaltyou, divine, kind listener, infinite presence. (Rg. 10-140-6) 
1449 :Agni, lord of universal love and friendship, he whose love and friendship, devotion and dedication, you accept i nto your ki nd care thrives under your protection and promotion and advances in life with noble and heroic progeny, moving from victory to glory. (Rg. 8-19-30) 
1450 :Agni, giver of the showers of joy in life, theworld of your creation flows on like drops of soma from the press, colourful, crackling voluble, exciting and fresh through the seasons, bright and beautiful, passionately lovable. You are darling of the glory of dawns and you shine ever in the glimmerings of the dusk and reflect in the ripples of water. (Rg. 8-19-31) 
1451 :That Agni, energy, the herbs and waters receive into them and they bear it as mothers, producing it on maturity as nourishment and energy for life forms. The same Agni, the herbs and trees of the forest receive equally, hold it in the womb and always produce it as the embodiment of energy. (Rg. 10-91-6) 
1452 :Agni, fire of yajna and light of the sun, indeed all light and energy of existence, rises, radiates and shines pure and powerful in honour and adoration of Indra, lord omnipotent, unto the heavens. It rises and shines on and on anew in space-time continuum as the ruling power of the omnipotent. Yo jagara tam rcah kamayante yo jagara tamu samani yanti. Yo jagara tam ay am soma aha tavaham asmi sakhye nyokah. Whoever is awake, the Rks love and bless. Whoever is alert, the Samans move and elevate. Whoever is active without a wink of sleep, this Soma of life's joy and ecstasy addresses and says: 0 seeker wide awake, I am for you, a friend and shelter home. (Rg. 5-44-14) 
1453 :Agnir jagara tain rcah kamayante gnir jagara tam u samani yanti. Agnir jagara tam ayam soma alia tavaliam asmi sakhye nyokah. To Agni, soul of life awake, the light of Rks radiateswith love.ToAgni, light of life awake, the songs of Samans vibrate with love. To Agni, the fire of life aflame, the streams of nectar flow with love, and to the soul of Iife, the Iight of awareness and the fire of acti on, the ecstasy of life says: I am yours with love, a friend, your very haven and home. (Rg. 5-44-15) 
1454 :Salutations to friends who have been sitting on thevedi earlier. Salutationsto those who come now and sit around. Salutations again and again a hundred times, no end. I use language of hundred variations of phrase, sing a thousand versions and variations of Gayatri, Trishtup and Jagati metres of verse in song. Gayatri, Trishtup and J agati metres in all formal variations sanctified in Vedic verses are the sages' love, they have made these their very life and being. Agni is fire, fire is Agni, both are one and the same. Indra, lightning, is light energy, lightning energy is Indra, both are one and the same. Sun is light and light is the sun, both are one and the same. The master and the master's potential, name and expression are one, the same, inseparable. Agni, come energy, again and again in cycle and recycle, come again and again with energy, life and good health, no end. Save us from sin, purify us from sin and evil, again and again. The cycle must go on. Come, visit, revisit again and again with wealth, honour, excellence and grace, with the universal flow of wealth, honour and excellence of health, age and divinity of the highest of existence, bless us, no end. Indra, lord of universal knowledge, power and prosperity, if I were, like you, the sole master of wealth, wisdom and power in my field, then pray may my dependent and celebrant also be blest with wealth and wisdom of the world. (Let all of us together be blest with abundance of wealth and wisdom under the social dispensation of our system of government and administration.) (Rg. 8-14-1) 
1455 :Indra, the divine voice of your omniscience, omnipotence and bliss overflows with universal truth and rectitude of the law of existence and showers the abundance of prosperity and advancement upon the dedicated yajamana who distils and creates the soma of joy for the world. (Rg. 8-14-3) 
1456 :A pah, liquid energies of cosmic space, surely you are creators and givers of peace and joy. Pray inspire and energise us for the achievement of food and energy for body, mind and soul so that we may see and enjoy the mighty splendour of divinity. (Rg. 10-9-1) 
1457 :Let us share here in body that nectar sweet taste of yours which is most blissful, be like loving mothers for their children. (Rg. 10-9-2) 
1458 :Vat a a vatu bhesajam sambhu mayobhu no hrde. Pra na ayuhsi tarisat. May the wind of life energy blow for us as harbinger of sanatives, good health and peace for our heart and help us to live a full life beyond all suffering and ailment. (Rg. 10-186-1) 
1459 :In your treasure home of inviolable energy, 0 breath of life energy, Vayu, there is immortal wealth hidden for us. Of that, from that, give us some, our share, so that we may live a full life of good health and joy. (Rg. 10-186-3) 
1460 :The potent, non-stop, procreative, all-form eagle- bird of life, bearing its own golden generative principle and form, wearing light of the sun, itself emerges according to the time and season of karma and creates its own yajnic form of existence. The seed of life lay in the waters, universal form, light and lustre of being which emerged on the earth. It established its own potential and power in the firmament. Thus does the seed of potent life raise and realize its voice and will to be in existence (bearing light of sun, lying in space, spatial waters, the oceans, in the firmament and on the earth). This Agni, self-refulgent light and life of the existence, pervading infinite forms in union with it, worthy of worship and communion by yajna and meditation, bears and sustains the light of the sun. It is a giver, thousandfold, hundredfold, infinite. It is the sustainer of heavens, the entire universe, and it is the master, fatherly ruler and promoter of the people of the world. H igh up over there abides the sun in the region of heavenly light. It bears wondrous weapons of divinity such as thunder and lightning. It wears a beautiful, fragrant form soothing for people to see, and like the light and bliss of heaven creates divine waters and many other dear divine gifts for life. (Rg. 10-123-7) 
1461 :When the sun in the third, highest, heaven, shining on the oceans and vapours in the skies with the light of its fervent rays reaches the clouds of vapour, then the blazing heat with pure and powerful energy catalyses the cl ouds and condenses the vapours i nto dear valuable drops that shower in rain upon the earth. (Rg. 10-123-8) 
1462 :Instantly swift, sharp as a lazer beam, terrible like a bull, breaker of the darkest cloud, shaker of mighty men, roaring awful without a wink, sole hero without a second, I ndra overthrows a hundred armies together at once. (Rg. 10-103-1) 
1463 :Indra isthewarrior with bow and arrows in hand, conquers w ith j oi nt armed forces, multi pi e enemy hosts, and wins over concentrated forces. Protector and promoter of soma peace and joy of life, strong of arms wielding a terrible bow, he throws out the enemies with the shots of his unfailing arrows. (Rg. 10-103-3) 
1464 :Fly by the chariot, Brhaspati, destroyer of demons, repelier of enemies, breaking through and routing their forces. Fighting and conquering by battle, come, defend and save our chariots of the social order. (Rg. 10-103-4) 
1465 :Indra, tactical organiser of deployable forces, venerable, strong, undisturbed and invulnerable, stout and brave, challenging, impetuous, blazing, steadfast, commander of the brave, highly intelligent, valiant, illustrious, pray ascend the chariot of victory over rebellious lands. (Rg. 10-103-5) 
1466 :May Indra, breaker of clouds and enemy strongholds, with his courage and valour, unmoved by pity, hero of a hundredfold passion, shaker of the strongest evils, destroyer of enemy forces, irresistible warrior, protect our army in our assaults and advances. (Rg. 10-103-7) 
1467 :Of these armies of the Devas, divine forces of nature and humanity, men of noble intentions and far sight, breaking through and conquering evil and negative elements of life, Indra of lighting power is the leader and commander, Brhaspati, commanding knowledge, tactics and wide vision, is the guide with yaj na on his right, and Soma, lover of peace and felicity, is the inspiration, while M aruts, warriors of passion and Great is the valour and passion of victorious and virile Indra, of the ruler Varuna, visionary Adityas and impetuous M aruts, all great and magnanimous at heart who shake the world with their vision and performance, and so let these victorious divinities' tumulluous uproar of victory rise and reverberate in the skies. (Rg. 10-103-9) 
1468 :Indra, M aghavan, lord of glory, ruler of the land, raise, cal i brate and sharpen your weapons, raise the mind and moral e of my brave warri ors, 0 breaker of the cl ouds and darkness of evil, raise the calibre and hitting efficiency of the fast moving forces of cavalry, armour and airforce, and let the roar of the victorious warriors rise and rumble in space. (Rg. 10-103-10) 
1469 :Asmakam indr ah samrtesu dhvajesv asmakam yd isavas td jayantu. Asmakam vird uttare bhavantvasmdh u deva avata havesu. In international gatherings, let Indra, our leader, raise our flag high in the flag lines, may our shots of arrows hit the targets and win the battles, let our brave progeny and our brave warriors be higher than others in excellence, and may the divinities protect us in the call to action in the battle field. (Rg. 10-103-11) 
1470 :Get off schizophrenia, that torment the heart and delude their mind, depart, ill health, that afflict and disable the body system of those who are children of light. Go forward, be there and burn with pain in the heart of those who are negative souls and love to abide with darkness of mind and sloth of body with suffering and unfriendliness as their food of life. (Rg.10-103-12) 
1471 :Go forward, leading lights, achieve your goals and win your victories. M ay Indra, lord omnipotent of honour and glory, bless you with peace and fulfilment. Let your arms be strong and bold so that you may live an active life of irresistible honour and joy withoutfear. (Rg. 10-103-13) 
1472 :Let kites and ravens, let deadly arrows, pursue them. Let that army be the food of vultures. Indra commander of the army, spare none of them, let the outrageous robber be destroyed. Let carnivorous birds follow, devour and scavenge them out. Indra commander of the mighty defence force, march upon the enemy army that attacks us. Indra, breaker of dark clouds over the land, and Agni, commander of the f i re force, both counter, rout and burn them with your fire power. Destroyer of the demon and the destroyer, break thejawsof evil. 0 Indra, destroyer of evil and darkness, shatter the mind and morale of the enemy who tries to suppress, subdue and enslave us. (Rg. 10-152-3) 
1473 :Indra, throw off those powers and tendencies which seek to destroy us. Subdue those who seek to fight and subdue us. Take those down to deep darkness who seek to subdue and enslave us. (Rg. 10-152-4) 
1474 :The two arms of Indra's forces are steady and strong, youthful, redoubtable, undauntable, unchallengeable. Let these two first be deployed when the occasion has arisen, since by these is conquered the mighty force of the asuras, warriors of negativity and destruction. Marmdni te varmana cchadayami somastva rajamrtenanu vastam. Ur or variyo varunas te krnotu jayantam tvanu deva madantu. Enemies are blind like cobras with heads and fangs lost. Of these, struck and bruised by fire, Indra should better eliminate every one discreetly. (Atharva 6-67-2) 
1475 :A ny one, whether our own or a stranger far away non-fighting, or far off and low, that hurts and violates us deserves that the best and enlightened of the nation punish him to nullity. For me, the Lord Almighty and the knowledge within me is my best armour for protection. The Lord Almighty and peaceof mind within is the invincible armour for me. (Rg. 6-75-19) 
1476 :Terrible like a mountain lion roaming around, pray come from the farthest of far off pi aces and, havi ng sharpened the lazer fiery thunderbolt, destroy the enemies and throw out the violent adversaries. (Rg. 10-180-2) 
1477 :Noble people of brilliant, generous and divine nature, help us to hear with our ears what is good and beneficial. Noble people dedicated to yajna, may we, by your favour and kindness see with our eyes what is good and elevating. May we, enjoying with firm and strong bodies and body parts, thanking the Lord Divine and praising the things given by Him live a full life fit for and blest by the divinities. (Rg. 1-89-8) 
1478 :May Indra, lord of power and majesty, abundant in food, energy and honour, be for our good and bless us with favours. M ay Pusha, lord of universal growth, be for our good and bless us with progress. May Tarkshya, lord worthy of love and friendship, destroyer of suffering, be good for us and bless us with good fortune. And may Brhaspati, lord of universal knowledge and wisdom be good and bless us with knowledge, wisdom and sweet language. (Rg. 1-89-6) 
