1 :Be vibrant as the winds and thank the Lord Creator, Savita, for the gifts of food and energy, light and life, for the body, mind and soul. Pray that you dedicate yourself to the noblest action, yajna, and play your part in the service of the Lord. Be blest with the best of health and wealth in plenty, cows, healthy, strong and fertile, sacred, not to be killed. No thief to rule over you, no sinner to boss over you ! Growing in power and prosperity, be firm and loyal to this Lord of the Nation and protect the wealth and honour of the yajamana. 
2 :Yajna is sacred. It is the light of the sun, the life of the earth, the breath of air, the holy warmth of life that sustains and sanctifies existence. Go on, expand and raise the joy of life to the heights of heaven. Neglect not yajna. May the Lord of yajna never forsake you. 
3 :Yajna is the sustainer and purifier of countless worlds. It is the sustainer and purifier of the universe in countless ways. May the lord creator Savita sanctify yajna. May the Lord purify and sanctify us with yajna and the knowledge of the Veda. What message do you hope to receive ? Yajna: it is the life of the world. It is the science and structure of the universe. It is the law and sustenance of the system. It is the very act of the Lord of Creation. I stand by it fast and firm with the light of knowledge and the joy of life. 
4 :Lord of the fire of yajna, Lord of Law and vows of faith, I take to the vow of commitment to truth and I give up the untruth. Bless me that I may be able to keep the vow. Bless me that I may realize it. 
5 :Who enjoins you? He enjoins you. Unto what does he enjoin you? Unto That/Himself (yajna) does He enjoin you. He enjoins you for karma (action) knowledge and virtue (through yajna). 
6 :Evil is uprooted, the selfish are eliminated. The lawless are punished and corrected. The selfish and antisocials have suffered and converted. Let us be generous, as vast as space. 
7 :Dhurasi dhurva dhurvantam dhurva tam yo ’smart dhurvati tam dhurva yam vayam dhurx’amah. Devanamasi vahnitamam sasnita- mam papritamam justatamam devahutamam. 
8 :Fire of yajna, you are destroyer and preserver both. You save by burning up the evil and the dross. Destroy that which destroys. Destroy him who desecrates the yajna. Destroy what our yajna burns to destroy. To the good you are the quickest and the fieriest, greatest purifier, giver of highest fulfilment, most reverenced and worshipped by the good and noble people. 
9 :Lord of yajna, Vishnu, yajna is simple, straight and natural. Bless and increase the materials of yajna. Neglect not yajna, 0 man. May the master of yajna never forsake it. Lord Vishnu, the sun, expands yajna to space to purify the air, to cleanse the environment of evil and pollution. Apply your mind and senses to purify the yajna (and augment its power). 
10 :In this yajna of the creator, Lord Savita, I perform the yajna with the heat of the sun and the cool energy of the moon, and with the two-way motion of the pranic energy of the air for the sake of the knowledge of fire and of fire and water in the service of the Lord and his children. 
11 :I set the vedi of yajna on the navel of the earth and in the centre of the sky for the prosperity of living beings and eradication of poverty and selfishness. Open the doors of the homes on earth and let us rise to the sky for visions of heavenly bliss. Lord of yajna, Agni, protect our yajna and the holy materials for oblations. 
12 :In this cosmic yajna of Lord Savita, holy fire and wind are two carriers of yajna, sanctified by the ceaseless showers of the purest rays of the sun. The holy waters electrified by the sun, raised by the fire and carried by the wind travel through space and sky and shower on the earth to feed the growth of life. May the same divine rays of the sun, fire and wind, and the holy water carry the yajna ever forward, and may these and the yajna bless the yajnapati to move ever onward with health, wealth and noble virtue. 
13 :In the cloud-break-up, Indra, the sun, raises the waters. On the break-up, the waters act under Indra, Sun and wind. The waters are holy and you are sanctified by the showers. I consecrate yajna for the sake of agni, fire. I sanctify yajna for the sake of agni and soma, fire and water. Be pure and seasoned for noble action, for godly yajna. If there be things gone impure and polluted, I purify the same with yajna for you. 
14 :The home of yajna is blessed. Evil is washed off. Selfishness and want is eliminated. Yajna is the shield of the earth, this home is the shield of the earth. Know this and the earth knows this and responds in covenant. 
15 :Yajna is the cloud in the vast sky, replete with water for the earth. It feeds and is fed by the greenery. It is the preserver of the earth and the sky. Know this and the yajna responds in covenant. 
16 :Yajna is the metaphor of Agni in fire, wood and soma stone, speaking in the divine voice. I do it for the gods to receive the gift of divine bliss. Prepare, prepare the holy food for the fire. Offer it to the gods and receive the divine bliss. Come, come fragrance of life, from the flames of yajna-fire. 
17 :You are the voice of the dawn soaked in honey- dew. Bring us the taste of life, strength of energy and the light of wisdom and, with you, we’ll win the battles of the world. Lord of rain as you are, open for us the flood-gates of showers. Sin is washed off, miseries are gone, evil is eliminated. May the wind refine and carry your gifts around. May the Lord of life and light hold you fast and bless you with his hand of gold. 
18 :Agni, Lord of yajna, bold and fearless you are, come and blow out the fire that consumes flesh cooked or raw; light the fire that brings holy men together for common good. Firm as you are, hold the earth steady and advancing. Protect the Brahmana for knowledge, protect the Kshatriya for justice and peace, protect all mankind and living beings. I call upon you for the protection of life, for the destruction of the enemies of life. 
19 :Lord of yajna, Agni, you are the centre-hold of the universe. Accept our hymns of praise and worship. Expand the light and love in our heart. I hold on to you for the protection of knowledge, justice and love for all like myself and for the elimination of the enemies of the joy of life. Lord of the cosmic dance of existence, protect and extend our vision of higher knowledge, justice and love of life as ourselves, and eliminate the enemies of the joy of life. We hold on to you for freedom and fearlessness from all directions in time and space. Children of the earth, be sanctified in freedom and fearlessness in your heart and soul, be consecrated in the bright and blazing discipline of the energy of life and the law of existence. 
20 :Yajna is the source of joy, it is joy itself. Evil is eliminated, selfishness is eliminated. It is the protective cover of the earth. Let the children of the earth know this. The chant is the voice of omniscience. It is the light of heaven and main-stay of the stars. The chant is the music of the showers and the thunder of the clouds. Let the children of the earth know, let the beneficiaries of heaven know and realize. 
21 :It is food consecrated by yajna, water purified by yajna. It is food for the gods, our body, senses, mind and soul. Take it for strength and energy, for smartness and vitality, for virtue and action toward a long and full life. May the Lord Savita, with His unstinted and generous hand, bless us with the gifts of light and life on the earth in abundance. 
22 :With the joint action of the light of the sun and the vital warmth of the earth, and with the up and down movement of the breath of air, I carry on a triple yajna in this creation of Lord Savita. The waters join and nourish the herbs, and the herbs join to produce the juices. The juices are mixed with the soothing herbs, and the soothing herbs with the honey-sweet juices. The yajna goes on. Keep it up and on for the sake of life and good health. 
23 :The yajna I perform is for the well-being and prosperity of all on earth. The materials I offer is for Agni, to atomize in the fire. It is for Agni and Soma, generative powers of nature, for the production of food. The fire of yajna is the life of the earth, it is universal. Expand it, O man, and join the generative powers of nature. May the Lord of Yajna, Agni, expand it for universal happiness. May the fire never injure your protection of body and wealth. May Lord Savita mature and perfect your yajna and bring about a very heaven of bliss on the earth. 
24 :Fear not, be firm in faith. Yajna is an act of faith. May the yajaman’s children and other people be faithful. Keep it up for three: fire, action and the materials; for the purification of air and rain; and for the sole aim of happiness and well-being. 
25 :In this world of Lord Savita’s creation, I perform the sacred act of yajna for the well-being of the holy ones, for benefit from the light of the sun, soothing peace of the moon and the vital breath of air. It is the mighty arm of the sun working with a hundred thousand rays maturing the vegetation on earth. It is the caressing power of the wind and the generative shower of the clouds on all forms of life for growth and energy. It is the death of mutual opposition, the elimination of hate and resolution of contradictions. 
26 :Prthivi devayajanyosadhyaste mulam md himsisam vrajam gaccha gosthanam varsatu te dyaurbadhana deva savitah paramasydm prthivyam satena pasairyo ’smdndvesti yam cha vayam dvismastamato md mauk. 
27 :Lord Savita of light and glory, I shall never do violence to the fertility of the earth, mother of vegetation. The earth is sacred, seat of yajna for the holiest of the holy. May the fragrance of yajna rise to the clouds and reach the sun and shower rain and light on the earth from heaven. On this holy seat of yajna, whoever oppresses us, and whom we oppose, bind him down with a hundred bonds and leave him not. 
28 :Apararum prthivyai devayajanadvadhyasam vrajam gaccha gosthanam varsatu te dyau- rbadhana deva savitah paramasyam prthivyam satena pasairyo’ smandvesti yam cha vayam dvismastamato md mauk. Araro divam md papto drapsaste dyam md skan vrajam gaccha gosthanam varsatu te dyau-rbadhana deva savitah paramasyam prthivyam satena pasairyo smandvesti yam cha vayam dvismastamato md mauk. 
29 :I destroy the evil from the earth which is the holy seat of yajna. Go to the congregation for knowledge, and shower the rain of knowledge and light of heaven on the earth. Lord Savita of light and glory, who ever opposes our yajna and whoever we oppose, bind him with a hundred bonds and leave him not. The wicked must not stop the light of heaven. The bubbles of his drink must not vitiate the nectar. Keep going to the congregation, bring the light of heaven on earth. 
30 :The earth is beautiful, kind and gracious, rich in comfort and security, food and energy, overflowing with the honey-sweet juices of fruits. It is so by virtue of yajna. I dedicate myself to yajna with the inspiring music of gayatri, ecstatic freedom of trishtubh, and illuminating expansiveness of jagati. 
31 :Lord of virtue and power, having taken up the earth with its generative power, you placed it in the region of the moon in life-friendly space. Brave men of honour and virtue take up mighty arms and eliminate the destructive, and restore its powers and dignity. Pious men in advance perform yajna with oblations of rejuvenating materials and restore the generative powers of the earth. Men of virtue perform yajna, fight negativities and keep the balance of nature. Yajna is the death of the enemies of life. 
32 :Yajna is not a sharp-edged weapon of destruction but a peaceful mode of regeneration. The lawless are uprooted, the selfish are driven out. I take up the yajna materials for the recuperative purpose and consecrate these for the offering. The force of yajna is positive, of love and non-violence, but it is most effective in operation. It corrects the lawless, converts the selfish and eliminates the destructive. I honor this power for the sustenance of nature, life and humanity. 
33 :Yajna, you are the nectar of life for the earth. You are the presence of Vishnu, the creative power of yajna. You are life on the earth and light in the sky. You are the tongue of Agni, tasting the sweets of life. I see this presence in truth with steady and blessed eye for the sake of food, energy, and the light of life, in every place and in every chant of mantra. You are so close, invoked so freely, so be gracious for me too. 
34 :Yajna, I consecrate you in the creation of Savita with a ceaseless shower of the purest rays of the sun. I consecrate you all in this cosmic yajna of Savita with a ceaseless shower of the purest rays of the light of Divinity. You are the light and fire. You are the life and immortality. You are the heaven, you are the Word, you are the darling of the gods, fearless and inviolable, you are the lord of worship for the pious, you are the light and life for humanity. 
35 :Yajna is seated in the vedi carved out on the ground, and it is carried to the sky by the window. I refine and consecrate the holy offerings for the fire in the vedi. The fragrance rises to the sky for the higher vedi there for the formation of waters. I refine and enrich the holy materials/offerings consecrated by the fire for the yajna in the sky. The yajna is holy waters floating in the sky for showers on the earth. I refine, enrich and consecrate the holy materials of oblations, offered with ladles into the fire, for yajna from the sky. 
36 :Yajna is shower of life for the earth. It is the fiery flag-pole of Vishnu. I refine the offerings with the stony grinder and cover the snug and beautiful vedi with food for the gods. The yajna is for the Lord of the earth, it is for the Lord of the world, it is for the Lord of all the creatures, it is for the best creative souls among humanity. 
37 :Agni, Lord Supreme of the light and life of the universe, worthy of worship and worshipped through yajna, is Gandharva, the rest and haven of the world that holds the earth and the Divine Word. It is Agni, the fire and the sun, and Indra, the wind and rain of the cosmic energy that feeds and sustains the dynamics of existence. It is Mitra and Varuna, complementary motions of the cosmic circuit which feed and maintain the vitality of life. May Gandharva uphold the yajna and be all-round protector of the yajaman for the welfare of the world. May yajna, the right hand of Indra, provide for all-round protection of the yajaman toward the welfare and advancement of humanity. May Mitra and Varuna by their natural and inviolable dharma, provide for the yajaman’s protection from above for the peace and progress of the world. Agni, worthy of worship, study and meditation, and worshipped, studied and researched through yajna, is the ultimate haven of the world, and yajna is the highest creative and productive action of humanity performed individually and collectively. 
38 :Agni, Lord Omniscient, may we, in this act of love and non-violence, light the fire of yajna, great and blazing giver of the gift of joy and prosperity, and may we, through this yajna, worship, study and meditate on you, Lord Almighty, greater than the greatest, most glorious and most generous giver of the light of happiness. 
39 :Yajna: you are samidha, food of Agni, for the illumination of rare qualities. May the sun, with its two- fold power of illumination and rejuvenation, protect and prepare you in advance for the sacrifice and higher life. May all the eight Vasus (abodes of life), eleven Rudras (sustainers of life) and twelve Adityas (lights and durations of life in time) come and participate in the rejuvenation as in the spring session of yajna. For this refinement and advancement of life I cover the yajna- vedi, snug, beautiful and pleasing, with holy offerings. 
40 :Ghrtacyasi juhurnamna sedam priyena dhamna priyam sada’ asida ghrtacyasyupabhpmamna sedam priyena dhamna priyam sada’ asida ghrtacyasi dhruva namna sedam priyena dhamna priyam sada’asida priyena dhamna priyam sada’ asida. Dhruva’ asadannrtasya yonau td visno pahi pdhi yajham pahi yajhapatim pahi mam yajhanyam. 
41 :You are an instrument of yajna, Juhu by name, the ladle to offer oblations into the fire. With your own dear place and position in the yajna, enrich this home with all the gifts of plenty. You are Upabhrta by name, close by to carry offerings for the fire. With your own dear position and power, bless this happy home with all the gifts of joy. You are Dhruva by name, firm and inviolable in yajna. With your own dear power and potential grace this blessed home with all the gifts of peace, freedom and progress. Be with this happy place, dwell here with all power, potential and grace, firm, secure, inviolable, in this blessed home of yajna, the seat of truth and righteousness. Vishnu, Lord Omnipresent and Universal yajna, protect all these, preserve and advance the yajna, protect and bless the yajnapati, save me and protect and advance the organization and system of yajna. 
42 :Agni is the Lord of light and life, it is fire both physical and vital. It is the giver and purifier of food and the secret of victory and glory. It is fast in motion and action, burning up the libations and sending them up into the sky. I worship Agni and refine agni through yajna for food and energy, light and victory. Salutations to the Devas, celestial powers of light; food for the Pitris, powers of nourishment. May they both help us with food and energy to win honour and glory for us. 
43 :Vishnu, Lord Omnipresent, universal yajna, I bring libations of ghee, pure and secure, for the devas through the fire of the vedi. Agni, Lord of Yajna, may I never neglect or violate yajna, and I pray I may always live in your protective shade. The fire in the vedi is the seat of Vishnu. It rises from the vedi to the vast sky and from there the sun and wind carry it all round and convert it into the noblest acts of the devotees. 
44 :Agni, Lord of light and life, protect the act of yajna into the fire, protect the fiery rise of fragrance into the sky, protect the heaven and the earth, and may the heaven and the earth carry on your blessed purpose of yajna. May the sun, light of the world, with its radiance convert the libation of holy materials into the richest food for nature and for holy men. This is the voice of Divinity. 
45 :May Indra, Lord Supreme of power and glory, in-vest me with the powers of sense and mind. May He enrich us all with the knowledge wealth and prosperity of the world. May all our hopes and aspirations come true and turn into blessings for all of us. May the mother earth invoked and served by us be kind and bless us. May Agni bless us from the vedi, the seat of yajna, with the gifts of fire. This is the voice of Divinity. 
46 :Heavenly Father, invoked and worshipped! May the Heavenly Father receive me into His care and bless me with the gifts of fire from the vedi, the seat of yajna. In this blessed world of Savita’s creation, you receive a free flow of good health and nourishment from the arms of Ashwinis and the hands of Pusha, nature’s currents of energy and the motions of vital air. Yes, with my own mouth, I take in the food and inhale the breath of life from the vital fire of the Lord’s yajna. This is the voice of Divinity. 
47 :Lord Savita, this is the yajna of creation, the dynamics of existence and the paths of living in Dharma with knowledge, action and worship together in yajna. This yajna is for thee, they say. It is for Brihaspati, man of knowledge, and Brahma, man of faith and vision, to know and receive the highest gifts of yajna. Lord of existence, save yajna by yajna, save yajnapati by yajna, save me by yajna. 
48 :The mind is fast, instant in motion. May my mind benefit from the offerings of yajna. May Brihaspati, Lord of the wide world, expand the yajna of existence. May the Lord sustain this yajna of ours in love and peace without violence. May the powers of nature be ever fresh, may all good people ever rejoice by yajna. Be firm by Om, the voice of existence, the Eternal Word, the very name of the Divine. Om and yajna is our haven. Let it be so in our heart. 
49 :Agni, Lord of the fire of Yajna, this samidha (fuel wood) is food for you. Burn with it, grow, expand and illuminate. With the growth of yajna, expand us too in body, mind and soul. We shall grow, and we shall expand in body, mind and soul. Agni, you are food. You are knowledge, speed and motion. You are the lord of knowledge, speed and progress and the winner of victories. Lor the growth of food and knowledge, for the acceleration of speed and motion, and for the sake of victory over want and evil in life, we study, refine and multiply the power of fire through yajna for the common good. 
50 :Agnlsomayorujjitimanujjesam vajasya ma prasavena prohami. Agnisomau tamapanu- datain yo’smart dvesti yam ca vayam dvismo vajasyainam prasavenapohami. Indragnyo- rujjitimanujjesam vajasya md prasavena prohami. Indragm tamapanudatam yo’sman- dvesti yam ca vayam dvismo vajasyainam prasavenapohami. 
51 :Let us follow Agni and Soma, lords of fire and water and win whatever this duo has won. With inspiration for growth and development, we dedicate ourselves to study and work. May Agni and Soma ward off whoever hates us. For the sake of growth and development, we reject whatever we don’t approve. Let us follow Indra and Agni, lords of power and fire, and win what this duo can win. With inspiration for growth and development, we dedicate ourselves to study and research. May Indra and Agni ward off whatever/ whoever hates us. For the sake of growth and development, we reject whatever we all hate. 
52 :Yajna is dedicated to the study of eight Vasus, supports of life, eleven Rudras, catalytic agents of the justice of existence, and twelve Adityas, centres of gravity and balance of nature. May we, with science and reason, know with reference to the sun and the earth what we can achieve with the yajna extended in space. May Mitra and Varuna, currents of vital energy, protect and enrich the world with rain. May the oblations in yajna rise to the sky with the wind, and from the sky to the sun with the cosmic currents, and bring down from there showers of rain to feed the rivers of earth. Just as birds go to rest in their nests, so do we, devotees of the Lord, meditate on the secrets of vaidic hymns to discover the mysteries of yajna. Agni, Lord of light and life, you are the giver of vision. Protect my eye and bless me with vision. 
53 :Agni, Lord of light and life, you hold and sustain the law of Dharma observed by the powers of nature and celebrated in the songs of the seers. I accept and act within the bounds of that law and feed upon the foods provided by nature and yajna. May I never neglect or violate that law. May I never be ungrateful to the Lord. May I never lose the vision of Divinity. 
54 :Stay firm, dedicated children of the earth, on the rock-bed foundations of knowledge and justice, and, great and expansive within the bounds of Divine law, sit around this yajna fire on seats of grass, chanting the holy songs of praise, offering the honey-sweets of your produce to the fire and receiving from agni, in return, the nectar of life. Thus you celebrate the Lord’s gift of life. Thus you enjoy in unison. Surrender and play your part, this is the voice of Divinity. 
55 :Ghrtacl stho dhuryau patam sumne sthah sumne ma dhattam. Yajna namasca ta ’upa ca yajnasya sive santisthasva sviste me santisthasva. 
56 :Fire and wind are foremost movers of the wheels of yajna. Replete in nutriments such as ghee and water, they are nature’s agents of the growth and sustenance of humanity in comfort and joy. Yajna and humility are auspicious for you. Be firm in your devotion and performance and you will live happy in the protective shade of the Divine. 
57 :Agne’dabdhayo’sitama pahi md didyoh pahi prasityai pahi duristyai pahi duradmanya ’ avisam nah pitum krnu. Susadd yonau svaha vad-agnaye samvesapataye svaha sarasvatyai yasobhaginyai svaha. 
58 :Agni, Lord of universal yajna, giver of life, free and without fear, save yajna from evil and violence, save me from suffering, save me from bondage, make our food free from poison and inedibles, may our home be a blessed place of peace and happiness. This oblation is for Agni, protector of the home and the earth, this is for Sarasvati, voice of the Divine, sister of honour. 
59 :Vedo’si yena tvarh deva veda devebhyo vedo’- bhavastena mahyam vedo bhuyah. Deva gatuvido gatum vittvh gatumita. Manasaspata ’ imam deva yajham svaha vate dhah. 
60 :Prajapati, Lord of the universe, omniscient, you are Veda, Divine Word Itself. The knowledge by virtue of which you are omniscient for the seers and sages, who know the Veda and the ways of the world, is the knowledge for me too. Enlighten me with that. The seers, having realized that knowledge of existence, sing the hymns and follow the paths of virtue. Lord of mind and knowledge, take this yajna with the winds to the heights of heaven and place it there. Our oblations for that yajna. 
61 :Let the yajna-vedi be covered with havan materials seasoned with ghee and offered by the best of devotees and let the fragrance, carried by fire, wind and currents of energy, rise to the heights of the sky with Adityas, Vasus and Maruts and, there in the regions of light, the sun would mix the fragrance with its rays and convert it into vital vapour to shower on earth as water. 
62 :(i) Who leaves (offers) the oblations into the fire? Who releases nature-materials into the cosmic yajna of creation? The yajnapati. Prajapati, Lord Creator and father of His creatures. For what purpose? For self realization. For His purpose of creation. For nourishment, for preservation and protection, for destruction of the destroyers. 
63 :(ii) Who gives you away/up? He gives you away/ up. For what purpose/to what end? For self-realization/ self-negation. For nourishment: you are the share of the good and the protectors; even of the wicked and the destroyers, but, for their punishment and destruction. 
64 :May Lord Tvashta, eternal maker and generous giver, bless us with lustre of character and light of knowledge, food for body, mind and senses, peace and nobility of mind, good and glowing health of body. May the Lord grant us all kinds of wealth and stability. May He complete and perfect whatever is wanted in our body and mind and refine us with culture and virtue. 
65 :Let us advance with holy light and lustre, honey- sweets of food and blooming health, and a mind at peace with noble aspirations, and attain all round prosperity. And may Tvashta, Eternal Maker and generous giver, complete what is lacking in our life and refine us to a state of perfection. 
66 :Divi visnurvyakramsta jdgatena chandasa tato nirbhakto yo ’smandvesti yam ca vayam dvismo ’ ntarikse visnurvyakramsta traistubhena chandasa tato nirbhakto yo ’smandvesti yam ca vayam dvismah prthivyam visnurvyakramsta gayatrena chandasa tato nirbhakto yo’smandvesti yarn ca vayam dvismo ’smadannad asyai pratisthaya ’ aganma svah sam jyotisdbhuma. 
67 :Vishnu, yajna, performed with the ecstatic chant of jagati verses, reached the regions of the sun, and from there eliminated all that opposes us and all that we oppose for the sake of life. Vishnu, yajna, performed with the spontaneous chant of trishtubh verses, rose up to the middle regions of the sky, and from there eliminated all that opposes us and all that we oppose for the sake of life. Vishnu, yajna, performed with the joyous chant of gayatri verses, went over the earth, and from there eliminated all that opposes us and all that we oppose for the sake of life. Feeding on the gifts of nature purified by yajna, let us rejoice, and in the service of the balance and harmony of life and existence, let us rise to the heights of heaven and we’ll be one with the light of knowledge and Dharma. 
68 :Lord of the universe, self-existent, self-refulgent, greatest of all, giver of light and honour, give me light and honour. I follow the path of the sun in orbit, the path of Dharma revealed by you. 
69 :Agni, Lord of the House of Existence, Master of knowledge and the fire of yajna, great as you are as the keeper and sustainer of the world, so may I too, with you as the ideal, be a good and efficient house holder. And you too, over me, head of this family, be the protector and sustainer of this household. May we two, husband and wife, together perform the duties of the home for a good hundred years. May I follow the path of life like the sun in orbit, the path of Dharma revealed by you. 
70 :Agni, Lord of vows in the discipline of Dharma and Truth, whatever vows at your behest I have followed or would follow, I have followed and would follow because you made it possible and would make it possible. This me here, whatever I am, I am. Whatever I sow, so shall I reap. 
71 :This oblation is for Agni, Lord of knowledge and giver of the gifts of knowledge and yajna through the science of yajna-fire. This is for Soma, lord of peace and prosperity and the beauty of the seasons and powers of nourishment. In truth and according to the voice of the Veda, the ignorant, the wicked, the cruel and unjust, robbers and grabbers of the vedi, seat of yajna, asuras of the earth are eliminated by righteous action for humanity. 
72 :And who are the asuras? They are masters of hypocrisy and the art of changing faces. Friends and allies of the wicked, they encroach upon the rights of others and fill their coffers with ill-gotten wealth. Enemies of humanity, they roam around the world like giants. Agni, Lord of light, justice and social yajna, let them be thrown out and eliminated from the face of the earth. 
73 :Trustees and guardians of society, men of knowledge and wisdom, justice and merit, take your share as you deserve and, in your own right and proper place here, rejoice and celebrate the victory of yajna. Make all others happy and, as they deserve on merit, let them too rejoice and celebrate. 
74 :Salutations to the seniors of knowledge for the joy of learning. Salutations to those seniors who fight out exploitation. Salutations to the guardians of society for the joy of life and the means of the good life. Salutations for economic, social and political justice. Salutations for the fight against suffering for the advent of happiness. Salutations for righteous anger against the wicked. Salutations to the seniors, leaders and the guardians of knowledge, justice and well-being, life of good health, prosperity and happiness. Come to our homes and institutions and bless us with your gifts. Come that we may offer you the best we have. Come and accept our hospitality and gifts of clothes as mark of gratitude. 
75 :Teachers of knowledge, masters of wisdom, admit into your house of learning this boy wearing a lotus garland as a mark of desire for education. Accept him and hold him here as a mother bears the foetus in her womb so that he grows and is shaped into a brave and cultured young man. 
76 :Be masters of your own wealth and power and manage it well with justice and in virtue. Offer liberal hospitality with love and reverence to the senior benefactors of society, men of knowledge, experience and wisdom. Offer them delicious drinks of water and nourishing juices, health giving milk and ghee, sumptuous foods and honey-sweet fruits to their satisfaction. 
77 :Light up the fire and raise it with fuel, serve it like an honourable guest with pure ghee, and offer rich oblations of samagri into it, with love and faith. 
78 :To the fire, omnipresent, lit up, rising bright and blazing, sanctifying everything around, offer libations of ghee, pure, inflammable and purifying. 
79 :Tam tva s ami db hi rah giro ghrtena vardhayd- masi. Brhacchoca yavisthya. 
80 :O agni, bright and beautiful, young and powerful, generous giver of things, we offer samidhas and ghee and raise you to the heights. 
81 :O fire, bright and beautiful, generous giver, here come to you my samidhas soaked in ghee and fragrant things. Accept them, accept them. 
82 :In expanse as vast as the bright heaven, in virtue as firm and generous as the earth, agni is ever present on the earth, in the sky and in heaven. Earth Mother, seat of yajna by the devas (noble people and the powers of nature) for the devas (good people and the powers of nature), here on the ground in the vedi on your surface, I place the sacred fire, consumer of the oblations of food, for the sake of food and energy. 
83 :— revolves in its orbit round the sun, its father and sustainer in heaven, through the presence of its mother, the waters in space. 
84 :The power of Agni is light and energy/electricity which creates and produces the circuitous currents- going up as prana in the universe as well as in the body, and the complementary current going down as apana in the body as well as in the universe. This universal energy of Agni is a mighty power which is the light of heaven and burns in the sun. 
85 :Vak, the speech mode of Agni, dominates thirty abodes of life (out of thirty-three) and is used in the service of its lord, Agni, for the expression of the light of knowledge with which the omniscient and omnipresent power illuminates the world. 
86 :Agni, Supreme Spirit, is the light (jyoti) of existence, and Light (jyoti), Eternal Consciousness, is the identity of the Spirit. Vak, the virtual speech of Eternity is the common attribute of both spirit and consciousness. 
87 :Sun, the Lord of Life, is the light (jyoti) of the world, and Light (jyoti), Omniscience, is the identity of the Sun, the Divine teacher of teachers. Veda, the universal voice of Divinity is the common attribute of both the knower (sun) and knowledge (Omniscience). 
88 :Fire is the power and prosperity of the world, and power and prosperity from the heat energy of fire is converted to power by science and technology. Tecknowledge with its language is for the common benefit of both, the fire and the user. 
89 :The sun is the power and prosperity of the world, and power and prosperity flows from the vital energy of the sun converted to power by science and technology. Tecknowledge with its language is for the common benefit of both, solar energy and the user. 
90 :Light is the Lord and the Lord is Light. Light and the Lord are one. Veda, knowledge, is coexistent with both in unison. We offer the oblations to the Lord for the Light in faith with reverence. 
91 :May Agni, along with Savita in His creation and the dark night of energy, receive this oblation. 
92 :May the Sun, along with Savita in His creation and the dawn of morning energy, receive this oblation. 
93 :Close to the vedi, while we are performing this sacred yajna, we chant the mantras for Agni who hears the chant near at hand as well as far away. 
94 :This Lord of the earth, Agni, who rules on high on top of heaven, constantly refreshes the generative powers of the waters for the earth. 
95 :Indra (wind and electric energy) and Agni (heat and fire), givers of energy, food, power and wealth, I call upon you both and invoke you for the gift of knowledge, energy, and food for joy and well-being. 
96 :Ay am te yonirrtviyo yato jato ’ arocathah. Tam janannagna ’ arohatha no vardhaya rayim. 
97 :Agni, Lord of the Universe, the fire is bom of vayu, wind and electric energy, and, according to the seasons, rises and shines and, like the suns, brightens the world. Knowing that, and with the knowledge of that, raise us and develop our power and wealth. 
98 :Here in the world of Lord Agni, the fire, placed and lighted in the vedi by the devotees, is the first and foremost agent of yajna for production and development. Adorable and worthiest of pursuit in study and research through collective action of the most cherished kind as it is, scholars of the science of heat and energy should maintain and continue through their disciples the tradition of research and development of this wonderful and versatile power in laboratories and institutions in every country for every community. 
99 :The Rishis and scholars dedicated to the study of the heat and light of agni in yajna have discovered and received the purest showers of the waters of life from this timeless source-power of a thousand gifts of achievement (just as you tend and milk the mother cow and receive the gift of the purest nourishment for life). 
100 :Tanupa ’ ague ’si tanvam me pahyayurda ’ague syayurme dehi varcoda ’ ague ’si varco me dehi. Ague yanme tanva ’ unam tanma ’ dprna. 
101 :Agni, you are protector of the body with health and nourishment. Protect my body. You are the giver of life. Give me full life. You are the giver of lustre and glory. Give me lustre and glory. Whatever is short and wanting in me, that, I pray, fulfil and complete and perfect. 
102 :Agni, wonderful lord and treasure-home of the wealth of the world, we, men of full life and vigour, strong yet forbearing, fearless and irresistible, having lighted the fire of yajna in worship of you — you, bright and blazing, giver of life and health, strength and forbearance, irresistible destroyer of enemies —we pray that we keep the fire of yajna burning and bright in honour and service of you. May we, by your grace and blessing, overcome the want and hurdles of life and attain prosperity and happiness. May we thus live on for a hundred years and more. 
103 :Agni, celebrated by the Rishis’ songs of praise, come full well with the light and glory and energy of the sun to your own home of celebrity. Come that I may also, with the same songs of praise and the pranic energy of the sun, come to attain a happy home, full age, honour and lustre, a good family and liberal means of life. 
104 :There are foods for health — herbs, vegetables, grains, etc. — I would feed upon these to be strong. There are foods for greatness — agni, vayu, electricity, knowledge, etc. —I would feed upon these and be great. There are foods for energy — water, milk, ghee, honey, etc. — I would take these and be smart and energetic. There are rich tonics — invigorating, rejuvenating — I would take these to increase my competence and efficiency. 
105 :(Know the quality of foods and drinks and take what is good to maintain your health and efficiency). 
106 :Revati — all the variety of wealth, good health, sense and mind, knowledge, ethics, good conduct, cows, etc. — may abound in this life, this body, this home, this farm-house, everywhere in this world. Rejoice, never forsake these. May these too never forsake you. 
107 :Immanent in all the forms of existence, universal energy, come, inspire and bless me, as a protector and sustainer. Agni, dispeller of darkness of the night, we come to you for light day in and day out. With all our wealth of food and energy, mind and intelligence, in all humility and faith, we come to you. 
108 :With all our wealth and power, in all faith and humility, we come to Agni, bright and blazing, protector and sustainer of yajnas, illuminater of Truth, Right and the Law of existence, thriving in His own state of bliss. 
109 :Agni, as father to the child, be the father, guardian and protector for all of us. Be with us always, for happiness and well-being. 
110 :Agni, life of our life, saviour, kind and gracious, be an intimate friend and giver of goodness. Vast abode of all, brilliant and all-percipient, bless us richly with the brightest wealth and knowledge of the world. 
111 :Tam tv a socistha cbdivah sumnaya nunaniimahe sakhibhyah. Sa no bodhi srudlii havamurusya no ’ aghayatah. samasmat. 
112 :Lord of the universe, Light of life, purest of the pure and self-luminous, we pray sincerely for happiness for us and our friends. May the Lord enlighten us and hear our chant of yajna, may He save us from sin and evil. 
113 :Come earth, come freedom, justice and abundance. May all desires come true wholly. May the Lord in-vest me with the stability of ambition and fulfilment thereof. 
114 :Lord of Eternal knowledge, keen as I am for knowledge and learning like a very child of Wisdom, shape me into a scholar with a sense of ethical values, a persuasive speaker and a teacher and maker of rejuvenating tonics. 
115 :May He who is Lord of wealth and knowledge, who destroys pain, grief and disease, who is the knower of all the good things of the world, who gives all physical and spiritual strength, who is keen and instant in doing and having things done, may He bless us with all virtues and good actions. 
116 :May our songs of praise never be lost. Lord of the universe and of the Divine Word, save us against the selfishness and violence of the mrtals. 
117 :Lord of the universe, may the generous and inviolable protection of the three, Mitra (pranic energy both internal and external), Varuna (air and water), and Aryama (sun and stability) be ours for the divine knowledge of the Veda, illuminating, irresistible, and great. 
118 :Never in their homes, nor in their paths of life, nor ever in their defences, shall there be any enemy or a supporter of evil. The Lord is in command of the life of the pious devotees. 
119 :Mitra, pranic energy, Varuna, air and water, and Aryama, the sun, they are the children of Imperishable Nature. They provide inexhaustible light and energy for the life and sustenance of the mortals on earth. 
120 :Indra, lord of generosity and well-being, when is it that you don’t wholly favour the man of charity, overwhelming him with gifts of knowledge and joy? Lord giver of power and prosperity, your gifts of reward for karma (action), again and again, constantly, follow upon the philanthropists’ acts of charity. 
121 :Let us meditate on the blazing glory of Savita, Lord Creator, pure and generous giver of light and happiness — glory which is magnificent, most worthy of our choice. And may the Lord with His grace inspire our mind and will to dedicate ourselves to noble actions. 
122 :That formidable chariot of knowledge by which you protect and redeem the man of charity in all ways from all sides, by that very chariot protect us too, Lord of the Universe, and let us cross the panorama of existence. 
123 :Bhurbhuvah svah suprajah prajabhih sydm suviro viraih suposah posaih. Naryaprajam me pahi samsya pasun me pahya-biarya pitum me pahi. 
124 :Lord Existent, Intelligent and Blissful, merciful to the noble people, protect my people, Lord worthy of praise, protect my wealth and cattle, Lord firm and irresistible, protect my food, I pray, may I be a happy family man with noble people and children, nobly brave with heroic friends around generously supportive, blest with rich means of health and support. 
125 :Agni, Lord of the Universe, blesses with all round honour and glory, all round enduring strength. Light of the world, may we realize and attain to the spirit omniscient of the universe, to the power omnipresent in the abodes of life in the world. 
126 :Aymagnirgrhapatirgarhapatyah p raj ay a vasuvittamah. Ague grhapate ’bhi dyumnamabhi saha ’ayacchasva. 
127 :This agni that resides in the home with the inmates is the sustainer of the home and brings all kinds of wealth to the family. Agni, Lord of Light and Energy, bless us with honour and glory all round and bless us with enduring strength all round. 
128 :This agni is the source of wealth, with it we grow and develop in health and prosperity, it helps to complete our plans and projects, to make up all our wants and to grow further. Agni, Lord of Light and Energy, bless us with all round honour and prosperity, bless us with strength and endurance all round. 
129 :Masters of the house, inmates of the home, fear not, tremble not. Bubbling with energy and power, go forward. With energy, power and enthusiasm, with a happy heart and high intelligence, I come home rejoicing at heart, for you. 
130 :The man far away, the visiting guest, remembers the homes abundant with happiness of the mind and open doors of welcome. We, the guests and chance visitors call at such homes. They know us, may they continue to know. 
131 :The cows are brought and called in, sheep and goats are brought and called in, and then, plenty of food is brought in and stored in our homes for your comfort and safety and for our comfort and protection. With all the means of comfort in safety, I am at peace with the joy of well-being. Peace! peace! and joy! We home-keepers invite and treat guests and learned men dedicated to yajna who, free from ignorance, are men of universal love, who fight evil and remove human weakness, and who welcome our hospitality and love and enjoy good food. 
132 :Whatever wrong we have done or might do in our village community, in the forest among the foresters (Vanaprasthis), in the assembly or in the mind with our senses, that we abjure and give up, and whatever is true and good, to that we commit ourselves and dedicate. 
133 :Mo su na’ indratra prtsu devairasti hi sma te susminnavayah. Mahascidyasya midhuso yavya havismato maruto validate gih. 
134 :Mighty Indra, in the battles of this life, protect us well along with the learned and the wise, hurt us not. Lord of infinite power, surely the high and divine voice of yours reveals the nature and virtue of those who, in every season, with appropriate samagri, perform the yajnas. The yajamana, host-performer of yajna, with his offerings sings the songs of praise in honour of the lord of rain and the carriers of the yajna, the winds. 
135 :Men of noble action, yajna, who act together in the company of the pious and dedicated people, using the delightful language of love in communication in accordance with the sacred Word of the Divine, Veda, having played their part, go home and retire from life in peace and tranquillity. 
136 :Cleansed and purified by knowledge and Dharma, I am calm and constant. You are calm and constant too. I collect and arrange the Samidhas (fuel wood for yajna) and through yajna, give up the sins committed with the mind and senses as well as the evil done with the body. You too save yourself from sin and evil. Lord Supreme, save us from violence, sin and evil, the cause of long suffering. 
137 :The ladle, full with ghee and samagri, goes up (to the sky from the vedi). It comes down to the earth, full again (with water). Lord of infinite vision and a thousand yajnas, may we too, yajamana and the priest, give and take, as in exchange,yajna, food, energy and other things. 
138 :Dehi me dadami te ni me dhehi ni te dadhe. Niharajn ca harasi me niharam niharani te svaha. 
139 :In truth of word: you give me, I give you. You use what I give you, I use what you give me. Give me for a price, I pay the price to you. 
140 :Lord of the world/assembly, Indra, your people, learned and wise, brilliant in their own right, with latest application of their mind and discovery/invention, sing in praise of the Lord, celebrate their success, feast and enjoy themselves and, dear even to others who are opposed, shake the enemies of humanity. Saddle your horses fast, Indra. Rise up, nation, with all your might and mind. 
141 :Lord of the world/President of the assembly. Indra, lord of all the wealth and power, brilliant and blissful to the eye, we sing songs of praise for you. Sung and celebrated, full of love and kindness, everything in bond with you, you proceed to us with all the gifts and blessings for us. Saddle your horses fast, Indra. Rise up, nation, with all your might and mind. 
142 :With the contribution of our predecessors, continuous sacrifice and dedication of our colleagues, and the generous resources of our seniors, we concentrate on the mind to develop its power and potential all round. 
143 :May the mind, seat of memory, come to us whole and entire, again and again, from birth to birth across time, for continuous and cumulative retention of knowledge, karma and sanskaras — seeds and impressions of thoughts, actions and ideas — for growing strength and competence, for increasing health and longevity of life and for a constant vision of the Sun, the Supreme Spirit of life and the universe. 
144 :May this wonderful sagely man, with the blessings of our forefathers who protected, prepared and shaped him, help us regain, here and hereafter, a noble mind and intelligence, so that with him we live a virtuous life of discipline and holy vows. 
145 :Soma, Lord of peace and creator of the universe, giver of health and vitality, may we, biding within the holy bonds of your discipline and our vows, with alert minds and healthy bodies, live on in peace and joy with our children and the community. 
146 :Man of justice, Rudra, this is your share of knowledge. Take it with its sister, companion, the vision of the Veda. Serve it with reverence. Extend it in creative action through yajna. Man of justice and power, this is your share of wealth. Take it with its sister, companion, the voice of the Veda. Serve it with reverence. Use and enjoy it with restraint. Take up the tool, the spade, and dig your garden. Work is wealth and worship. Use the tool and the wealth with the voice of the Veda. 
147 :We worship Rudra, Lord of justice, destroyer of evil, brilliant and generous, constant in vision and awareness in the three phases of time, past, present and future. We worship him so that we eliminate want and suffering, so that he may bless us with comfortable homes, greatness and honour, and firm resolution in hard work and industry. 
148 :You are the panacea, universal cure for the ailments of the body, mind and soul, saviour against the evils of ignorance, injustice and poverty. You are the healer for the cows, horses, humans, rams and their females. You are health and happiness for all. 
149 :We worship Rudra, Lord of the Universe, constant and invariable in all the three phases of time, and the first cause of health, growth, prosperity and happiness. May we, with His grace, be released from the bonds of death into freedom, immortality and eternal joy (ananda), just as the ripe fruit of melon falls off from the stalk on the branch to fullness and freedom. And may we never fall off from the state of freedom, immortality and eternal joy in the company of the Lord. We worship the Lord, Rudra, constant and invariable through time, purest and purifying, sustainer and protector who reveals Himself to His devotees. May He with His grace release us from the bonds of mortality here just as the melon fruit is released from the stalk, but we may never fall off from freedom, immortality, ananda and the presence of the Lord. 
150 :Rudra, warrior of the bow in readiness, strong in position with shield and armour, this is the way you defend and protect. Come down from the mountain heights and be with us wholly. Hurt us not, be good and kind and gracious. 
151 :Bless us with the threefold life — of the body, mind and spirit, for the three stages of life - childhood, youth, and age, upto 300-400 years, for all the ashrams (functional periods), and all the varnas (professional communities). Give us the threefold life of the eye, internal and external, of knowledge of the body, mind and soul, and of the world. Give us the threefold life of creativity for service, growth and spirituality. Give us the threefold life of the devas, the learned, wise, generous people, for excellence, contribution and removal of ignorance, injustice and poverty. 
152 :Rudra, Lord and father, Shiva you are by name, saviour, giver of knowledge, peace and prosperity. Salutations to you in reverence and worship. Hurt me not, father. I abide and pray for life and health, food and sustenance, virility, children, family, strength and prowess, prosperity, and freedom from suffering. 
153 :Lo! here we come to this holy place of yajna for the gods, powers of health, where the noblest of the world collected and delighted in their sacred enterprise. With joyous recitation of Riks, Yajus and Samans (with knowledge and action in the hope of joyous benefits) we offer food for the fire with libations of rich materials energetically and enthusiastically and cross the hurdles and suffering. May the holy waters bring health and peace. Noble herb, cure and save; unfailing power, do not hurt or kill this person. 
154 :Apo’ asman matarah sundhayantu ghrtena no ghrtapvah punantu. Visvafn hi ripram pravahanti devirudidabhyah sucira puta’ emi Diksatapasostanurasi tain t\’d sivam sagmam pari dadhe bhadram varnam pusyan. 
155 :Mother waters purify us: with their essence and efficacy, they sanctify us. The waters are sacred powers of nature: they wash off the entire dirt and let all the wanted health and knowledge flow in. Pure and sanctified by the waters, I come up. This body is a gift of Diksha and Tapas, commitment to health and laws of nature, and hard discipline of body, mind and soul. That body I bear as a blessing, lovely, strong and graceful, shining with the golden glow of good health. 
156 :The waters of life flow to the earths from the sun. The life of the cloud radiates from the sun. The sun is the giver of light and lustre. Give me the light and lustre of life. The sun is the giver of the light of the eye. Give me the light of the eye internal as well as external. 
157 :Lord of intelligence and awareness, I pray, enlighten me. Lord of the Divine Vak, I pray, sanctify me with the voice of the Veda. Savita, Lord Creator of the universe, I pray, consecrate me with a ceaseless shower of the purest rays of the sun. Lord of purity, purest of the pure, whatever the desire for which I pray for purity, that desire may be fulfilled. Bless me that I may make it possible. 
158 :Devas of Yajna, mother powers of nature, learned and wise men, experts of the science of yajna, through the performance of this yajna, we pray for virtues of character, competence and of noble action. We, devotees of yajna, ask for your blessings that our desires and projects may be fulfilled and completed with success. 
159 :With the voice of the Veda, in the language of expertise through education and training for the illumination of knowledge, with the sentiments of truth and love in togetherness for the sanctity of dealings in the business of living, I begin the yajna from the purity and sincerity of the mind, from the wind, and then from the vastness of the sky and space, in the service of the earth and heaven. 
160 :This oblation is for lighting of the fire for the resolution and dedication of the mind to virtue and the voice of the Veda. This is for the development of intelligence and the study of science and electricity for the general good in the language of common understanding. This is for commitment to Dharma and the teaching and learning of solar energy and the original universal heat in the language of universal understanding. This is for knowledge and education and the study of nourishment and vital heat of the body with scientific language for all. We study the heavenly waters of great and universal good and peace, earth and heaven and the vast middle regions of the sky. And we study all these with oblations of appropriate samagri materials with the chants of the divine revelations of the Vedas. 
161 :May all mankind choose and pray for the love and friendship of the Lord and Ruler of the world, and may all, with prayers to Him, try for the attainment of wealth and prosperity for health and growth. 
162 :djcH-iwrii: (vic'd esprit dmri'h; ft t mihmhhm i vidlfri puf ri w ddfd53TT^ m tt Rksamayoh silpe sthaste vamarabhe te ma patamasya yajhasyodrcah. Sarmasi sarma me yaccha namaste ’ astu ma ma hiihsih. 
163 :After the study of Rigveda and Samaveda, both treasures of science and technology, in which study the content of the verses is actually realized, I begin this practical yajna of science and technology (in the laboratory and the workshop). May the two protect me and bless me. Reverence and salutations to you, to the teacher, to the Lord. Accept my salutations. Hurt me not, put me not off. You are peace and comfort. Give me peace and comfort of mind. 
164 :You are tecknowledge, giver of wealth and power, realized with the energy of fire (heat), revealer of the secrets of energy and cover of safety for the creations of power. Give me energy and power. 
165 :You are the source of comfort and prosperity, gifted by yajna created by the man of knowledge, meant for the people devoted and dedicated to yajna by the grace of Indra. Increase and multiply the products of agriculture. Herbs and trees, grow and increase. Nourish, protect and help me to grow and rise high. Nourish and protect the man of yajna who has realized the mysteries of the power of the divine knowledge of nature. Save us from sin and evil. 
166 :Keep the vow of yajnagni, the fire of yajna. Agni is Brahma, the ultimate existent, omniscient, blissful Reality. Agni is yajna, individual, collective and ultimate act of creation. Agni is the nourishing and sustaining power of the forests, and must be served through yajna. We work and pray for sacred intelligence — excellent instrument of the knowledge and pursuit of science and spirituality, source of brilliance and power and the means of the extension and development of yajna — for the sake of happiness and well-being. May this intelligence, bright and gracious, saviour as a ‘tirtha’ for pilgrimage, ever shine in our mind and faith. May the masters of the science of yajna, men of genius, dedication and application of mind protect us, nourish us, advance us. Theirs is the language of enlightenment. They have it for us, for yajna, for Agni, for Brahma. Keep up the vow. 
167 :Taste and drink deep of the celestial waters of immortality, so sweet and agreeable to assimilate and internalize. Free from sickness, disease and sin, peacegiving and replete with knowledge and wisdom for all of us, they extend the frontiers of our knowledge of truth and divine law. They protect you against diseases like fever, dysentery and tuberculosis. 
168 :This body of yours is for yajna by yajna. I release the waters but not my creation and my people — I save my people. Mix the waters — sterilized, purified, reinforced, invigorated — wholly and fully with the earth, and you too be one with the earth (to regain health and vigour). 
169 :Agni is universal, ever awake. It is awake while we are awake. It is awake while we are asleep. Never relenting, it protects and preserves us. And after our sleep it wakes us up again. 
170 :After sleep, after death, after Pralaya, annihilation, we get back the mind, we get back the life, we get back the vital pranic energy, we get back the spirit, we get back the eye, the ear, and all other senses. May Agni, immanent life and lord of the earth, irresistible and indomitable, save and protect us from despicable evil and sin. 
171 :Agni, Lord of the universe, immanent vitality and energy of the world, you are the guardian and preserver of our spiritual vows, moral commitments and projects and resolutions in the mortal human world. You are worthy of adoration, of study, service and development, through yajna and collective enterprises. Soma, lord giver of honour and glory through art and industry, give us the wealth of success and honour again and again. 
172 :Savita, Lord Creator of the world, giver of stability and security of home, give us inspiration, security and stability of the good life. 
173 :O man, virile and brave, this body is yours, borne with love and service and maintained for Vishnu, sustainer of the world, and for yajna, noble action. It is your honour and glory. Be with it, act with mind and soul and achieve the glory of life. You are fast in action and vibrant in spirit. Act fast with your mind and soul and achieve the brilliance of knowledge and wonder of succes in enterprise. 
174 :Lord Creator, true and glorious, in the yajna of creation of yours, with electric energy and the divine knowledge of the Veda in unison, I pray, I may design an instrument and apparatus of the form and structure which would be faultless and a source of comfort, peace and happiness for all in general, and a matter of pride and satisfaction for the scholars. 
175 :Lord of truth and glory, in this creation of yours, great is the use of the vision and power of the language of Divinity, Veda, in the development of human society. So is the use of the power of universal electric energy. It gives us an awareness of knowledge, which makes thought and communication possible. It is a tool and instrument of intelligence and will. It facilitates expertise and the business of governance. It augments yajna and production, which is efficacious and powerful both internally and externally. It is permanent and indestructible, and a source and means of comfort and well-being before and after. We pray that Pusha, the powers of nourishment and development friendly to mankind, may hold and control the use of these powers in the way of their application in the service of the Lord Supreme, observer and controller of the wealth of the world, and may the Lord protect humanity in the course of their progress. 
176 :May your mother approve and bless your pursuit of energy and the literature of knowledge. May your father permit and bless and help, may your brother agree and support, may your friend in the community consent and cooperate in your project. May that goddess of light and energy come and bless you with sweet success in your programme for the glory of Indra and the happiness of humanity with beneficent means of comfort and wellbeing. May the Lord of justice and love inspire you. May the scholar of Rudra discipline and knowledge guide you. May success and honour come to you again and again, friend of humanity and devotee of the Lord Supreme, for the sake of life and the environment. 
177 :This energy and the language (which you pursue) pertains to the heat of agni that supports life on earth, pursued by scholars of twenty four years discipline. It relates to the pranic energy of life, pursued by scholars of forty-four years discipline. It pertains to the solar radiation, pursued by scholars of forty-eight years discipline. It is blissful as the light of the moon. It is correct and beneficent like the justice and love of Rudra, it is brilliant like the glory of the sun. And this energy is indestructible, eternal. May the great lord of knowledge, Brihaspati, inspire you; may Rudra, lord of love and correctness, dedicate you; may they bless you to enjoy this noble pursuit of yours and shine with the scholars dedicated to life-energies of nature. 
178 :Adistyastva murddhannajigharmi devayajane prtliivya ’ idayaspadamasi ghrtavat svaha. Asme ramasvasme te bandhustve rayo me rayo ma vayam rayasposena viyausma toto rayah. 
179 :Energy and Word of the Divine, you are on top of the sky, in the middle of the earth, and in the chant of the divine verses in celebration of the devas in yajna. I light up and activate the energy and the Divine voice with rich libations of ghee and chant of the vaidic hymns. You too light up and activate this energy and the Divine voice. Come with us and rejoice. It is our brother, our love, yours too. Wealth is yours. Mine too. The wealth of knowledge, power and materials you gain. We too. Knowing, resolving and doing, we may never be void of this wealth of life for health and happiness. 
180 :With a vision and intelligence, inspired, enlightened and versatile, precise, scientific and practical, I clearly see the divine gifts of natural energy and the voice of the Veda, and describe and show them applied and enacted in actual life. May this energy and this voice never hurt my life. May I never neglect or lose it. May I never be unfair to your heroes. You too never be unjust to my heroes. 
181 :Esa te gayatro bhaga ’iti me somaya brutadesa te traistubho bhaga ’iti me somaya brutadesa te jagato bhaga’ iti me somaya brutacchando- namanam sdmrdjyamgaccheti me somaya brutadasmako’si sukraste grahyo vicitastva vicinvantu. 
182 :“This is that part of Soma-Yajna which you can realize for yourself with the Gayatri verses”, say this for me, to the seeker of the chemistry of Soma. “This is that part of Soma-Yajna which you can realize for yourself with the Trishtubh verses”, say this for me, to the seeker of the manufacture of Soma. “This is that part of Soma-Yajna which you can realize for yourself with the Jagati Verses”, say this for me, to the seeker of the value of Soma. “Perform the Soma-Yajna with the specific verses for social management and governance and be on top of success”, say this for me, to the seeker of the power of Soma. You are pure, specialist of Soma- Yajna, you are purifier, you are ours, so wise, knowledgeable, so adorable. We, the seekers of knowledge and discrimination, accept you, support you and advance the yajna. 
183 :For the love of the people I adore the lord of light, creator of earth and heaven and the middle regions of the skies, the eternal poet who composed this wonderful world of paradisal beauty and truth adorned with the jewels of life from His inexhaustible treasure of nature, lord so dear to the learned and the wise, the brilliant manifestation of whose existential form blazes in the heaven above and the earth below which He made. With His infinite mercy He created the regions of bliss for the people, the creatures He created and loved. The people adore you, lord, with their breath of life. Lord of the golden bough in both hands, bless the people with the breath and energy of life existential as well as eternal. 
184 :Yajna, you are a symbol of the discipline of fire. You are the golden choice of Prajapati, father of the creatures. Your gifts are begot for the price of the highest wealth. You are pure and immaculate, begot in return for the purest offering of mine. Golden and blissful you are, I offer the richest gold of my life for the celestial bliss. You are the nectar of life. I get you with the offering of the immortal knowledge I have. Your wealth is in the womb of the moving earth and the environment. May that wealth be ours too with yajna. You nourish life in a thousand ways. May I, by the grace of Prajapati, participate in the nourishment. 
185 :Friend of friends, man of knowledge and wisdom, come, be friends with us. Pleasant and aspiring, come along, sit on the right side of Indra, lord of power and wealth and knowledge. Gentle and decent, come to the gentle and the decent. Persuasive teacher, guardian of Soma, brilliant, fearsome to the wicked and the non- serious wasters, smiling, versatile, dominant master, defend and protect those who value the gifts of Soma and knowledge. Let no one bully you. 
186 :Agni, Lord of light and life, save me all round from evil, drive off from me all that is bad in character and conduct. Establish me firmly in good character and conduct. Help me stay up there for a long age of goodness and high immortal virtue. 
187 :Agni, lord of light and life, may we all follow the path of goodness, love and non-violence by which the good man keeps off all hate and fear and attains to the safe haven of happiness and freedom. 
188 :Varuna, Lord of the universe and power of the sun and wind, you are the protective cover of the earth and the presiding presence of its order. Omnipotent Lord, you keep the heaven and the sky in position and maintain the excellence of life on earth. Glorious ruler of the world, you are the absolute centre and circumference of all the spheres of the universe, and all of them move in observance of the inexorable law of the divine power. 
189 :Varuna, Lord Supreme, put expanse into waves and forests, velocity in the motion (of waves and winds), speed in the horses, milk in the cows, vision and will in the hearts, heat and desire in the living creatures, sun in heaven, nectar of life in the cloud, juice in the soma plant, and the soma plant on the mountain. 
190 :Ascend to the eye (light) of the sun, and enter into the pupil of the eye of agni (light of fire) where, self- illuminating with the rays of your light, you would be approached and pursued by the discriminative scholar of science. 
191 :Scholars dedicated to science and spirit in search of the good life should commit themselves to the study and application of the energy of the sun and vayu (wind and electricity), both treasures of scientific power and means of comfort, to be specifically investigated and used just like two bullocks bearing the burdens for life’s comfort to the house of the master without tears or hurt to anybody but supporting the young and the brave. The scholars also, for guidance, should reach the senior man of knowledge who, too, silently bears the burdens of life for the knowledge and comfort of others. Let the joy and comfort of this scientific yajna, in consequence, reach the home of the yajamana. 
192 :Lord of the earth, master of knowledge, you are a blessing for me. With the product of your study and my effort and support, reach any part of all the regions of the world shooting to your destination as an eagle. May no robber, no thief, no wolfish highway man, no man of evil pursuit, meet you on the way. May no one rob or deceive you or steal anything. Let the product of your yajna and mine reach the house of the yajamana fast. 
193 :Salutations in reverence, recognition and gratitude to the Sun, best friend, highest, all-seeing, great, brilliant, far-seeing light of the world, self- luminant,child of heaven. Sing in praise of him, serve his law of right and truth in life. 
194 :You are the bond and ultimate pillar of the universe. You are the centre and sustenance of vayu’s hold on things and the sun’s two-fold power to move the waters in space. You are the mainstay of the world’s phenomenal reality of Satyam and the seat and working of Rtam, the universal law of Right and Truth. By your grace only, we realize the meaning of existence and follow the divine law of Dharma. 
195 :Yd te dhamani havisa yajanti ta te visva paribhurastu yajham. Gayasphanah prataranah suviro ’viraha pracara soma duryan. 
196 :Lord of the universe, whatever places are sanctified by the performance of yajna with oblations in your honour, all such places, O Soma, yajna may grace and sanctify for us too — yajna, promoter of the home, family and wealth, saviour from suffering, maker of the brave, redeemer of the weak, all-round generous and universal, may sanctify us too. Soma, scholar wise and dedicated, go round, speak for, propagate and perform yajna in every home. 
197 :Yajna (Yajna materials), you are the body of fire (heat and electricity) dedicated to Vishnu for the completion of the noble act of service. You are the body of Soma (life-juice of the created phenomena) dedicated to Vishnu, for the purification of the air and the environment. You are the hospitality for the chance- visitor, dedicated to Vishnu for the attainment of knowledge. I do the yajna and offer the libations for Vishnu, for the ‘eagle’, fastest carrier of Soma to the Yajamana, for rapid advancement of the science and power of yajna. I offer the libations to the fire for the development of wealth and energy, for Vishnu, the powerful giver of virtue, for knowledge and the ability for action. 
198 :Yajna (yajna materials), you are the birth-place of fire, source power of fire-arms. You are the food of the cosmic agents of rain, air and the sun. You are the producer and provider of various comforts of life. You are the secret of the knowledge of the Shastras through learned gatherings. I refine and kindle the fire with the inspiring chant of the Gayatri verses. I invigorate you and raise the fire with the exhilarating chant of the Trishtubh verses. I boost you and rouse the fire with the ecstatic chant of the jagati verses. 
199 :May the teacher and the disciple of the science of yajna be of equal mind in teaching and learning, harmonious in knowledge and instructions, gentle and free from coarseness in manners and communication. May these two devotees of the fire of yajna be auspicious harbingers of peace and happiness for us. May they not disturb or ruin the yajna. May they not hurt the yajnapati. 
200 :Agni (fire) present in agni (electricity) is universally active and operative. Deeply involved in the study of agni, child of the rshis of scholarship, one with his subject, graceful, enlightened, serious and dedicated, the teacher and researcher roams around with his love. May he, for us here, carry on the yajna of his project with the libations of his special materials and create new knowledge and food for further yajna. 
201 :Lord/Energy and Power of the universe, indestructible, dauntless and undaunted, light and lustre of the powers of nature, faultless and protector against misfortune, beyond calumny and condemnation, I accept/take you for all-over protection from all sides, for a blooming body, for the gift of ability, strength and power, prowess and lustre, so that you help to put me in a state of comfort and welfare in a straight and natural way and I celebrate in song the true and eternal cause of the good life. 
202 :Ague vratapastve vratapa yd tava tanuriyam sa mayi yo mama tanuresa sa tvayi. Saha nau vratapate vrtanyanu me diksam diksapati- rmanyatamanu tapastapaspatih. 
203 :Agni, Lord/Power of light and energy, omnipresent protector and keeper of the vows of discipline, I take the vow of discipline and study and come in to you. This presence of yours is in me, and the same presence in me is in you. You and I are together, the preceptor and the disciple are together. Lord protector of the vows of discipline and pursuit, Lord of commitment and consecration, Lord of fire and relentless exercise of discipline, recognize and permit our vow of discipline and study, approve and consecrate my commitment, accept and bless my dedication and pursuit of the undertaking and programme. 
204 :Amsuraihsuste deva somapyayatamindrayaik- adhanavide. A tubhyamindrah pyayatama tvamindraya pyayasva. Apyayayasmant- sakhintsannya medhaya svasti te deva soma sutyamasiya. Esta ray ah prese bhagaya’ rtamrtavadibhyo namo dydvdprthivibhyam. 
205 :Soma, Lord and spirit of life, power brilliant, omnipresent in nature, master of unique knowledge and promoter of wealth, nurture the growth bit by bit, wave on wave, for the glory of Indra, the power of nature, and may Indra, the power, grow for you, the spirit. And may the seeker (the master and the disciple) grow for the joy of life. Help us grow, help our friends and comrades grow by virtue of your penetrating intelligence. Let joy and comfort grow. May success greet you! Man of brilliance dedicated to the spirit of life, joining you in your creative efforts for the production of food and energy, and the achievement of honour and prosperity, may we obtain the wanted power and wealth of life. To the speakers (and discoverers) of the Law (of nature), knowledge (of truth and law)! To earth and heaven, salutations (in gratefulness for fire and light and growth)! Agni, Lord of fire and speech, your presence (in the devotee), silent but potential as in the metals of the earth, generous and deep in the caverns of the mind, defeats the cruellest and most fearsome words of the opponent. Your presence (in the devotee), loud and powerful as in the air and waters of the sky, generous and deep as in the caverns of the clouds, defeats the strongest and most passionate words of the opponent. Your presence (in the devotee), clear and brilliant as in the rays of light, generous and deep as in the implosions of the sun, overwhelms the most brilliant and most formidable speech of the opponent. This is the voice of nature. This is the voice of the Veda. This is the voice of the Divine. 
206 :Taptayani me’si vittayani me’syavatanma nathitadavatanma vyathitat. Videdagnirnabho namagne’ ahgira’ ayuna ndmnehi yo’syam prthivyamasi yatte’nadhrstam nama yajniyam tena tvd dadhe videdagnirnabho namagne’ ahgira’ayuna ndmnehi yo dvitlyasyam prthivyamasi yatte’nadhrstam nama yajniyam tena tvd dadhe videdagnirnabho namagne’ ahgira’ayuna ndmnehi yastrtiyasyam prthivyamasi yatte ’ nadhrstam nama yajniyam tena tvd dadhe. Anu tvd devavitaye. 
207 :Agni (fire, electricity and light) is the bringer of home for the homeless and wealth for all. It saves from destitution and exploitation, and from fear and deprivation. Know this agni: it is water from the sky, lives in the body parts as vital heat and comes bearing the name of health and longevity. It lives in this earth and that is its yajnic and indestructible form. For that reason, we light it in the vedi, raise it and feed it for the attainment of noble virtues. 
208 :Know the agni: it is in the vapours in the sky, the second region of space, in its yajnic and indestructible form. It comes bearing the name of health, longevity and comfort. For that reason, we light it in the vedi of science, raise it and feed it for the attainment of noble virtues. 
209 :Know the agni: it is light which illuminates various regions of the universe and lives in the moving sun in heaven, the third region of space, in its yajnic and indestructible form. It comes bearing the name of health, logevity, prosperity, light and life. For that reason, we light it in the vedi of technology, raise it and feed it for the attainment of noble virtues. 
210 :Speech is powerful, as powerful as a lioness. Develop it for the good people so that they can face a rival and prevail. Purify it so that the noble people can resist an adversary and defeat him. Beautify it so that the holy people can fight out the enemy and win over darkness and evil. 
211 :(Speech is a sacred trust to be developed and preserved.) The voice of the Divine Power, Veda, and the scholars of the Veda, with the observation of the external world of the Vasus such as the earth and work of the ‘vasu’ scholars of 24 years standing may develop the language of science from the front, taking it forward. Pracheta, the man of awareness and illumination, with insight into the internal world of the pranas and the spirit and work of the scholars of 36 years standing may extend it and preserve it from behind. The man of judgement and valuation as fast as the mind (manojawa), with the senior scholars past and present, should maintain the clarity and acceptability of its meaning and refinement on the right side of it. Vishwakarma, scholar of the world of existence and the structure of language, with the work of the scholars of 48 years standing, should maintain the overall beauty and effectiveness of it. (This is the yajna of creative speech.) With the fragrance of this yajna I breathe out the vapours of Vak (universal language) to be crystallized into the objective speech of communication. 
212 :Language is sacred and it is power. It is the treasure of science, science of the stars and light especially of the sun in the zodiacs. It is the language of the Veda and eliminates ignorance. It is the language of governance, administration and military science and fights out injustice and crime. It is the language of economics, commerce, finance and management and removes poverty and suffering. It is the language of social science and human welfare and eliminates antisocial forces. For the yajamana it brings spiritual knowledge and noble virtues. I serve and develop this noble language through yajna for the enlightenment and happiness of all the living beings. 
213 :Yajna is firm and immovable, the centre of movement. It develops the earth and enriches its wealth. Develop yajna. It is the treasure-home of knowledge and prosperity. It expands the sky and increases its wealth and waters. Develop yajna. It is the seat of indestructible wealth. It expands radiation of light and energy from the regions of the sun and brings the light of knowledge. It supplements and sharpens the powers of nature. Develop yajna. Expand. Accelerate. Intensify. It is the completion, the finale. 
214 :Savita, the Creator, Omnipresent Lord Supreme of infinite knowledge and Karma. Wise and dedicated men of multiple orders of yajna concentrate their mind and intelligence on that One Universal Presence. Knowing that language of celebration and Karma I meditate on the presence of the Lord all alone by myself. 
215 :Vishnu, Lord omnipresent sustainer of this dynamic world, visible and invisible, created it in three fold order — earth (prithivi), skies (antariksha) and heaven (dyu), or sattva (mind), rajas (motion) and matter (tamas) — and, alongwith the mystery that it is, set it in space. This is the divine voice. 
216 :The earth full of grain, rich in cows, covered with grass and greenery so pleasing to man, this earth with all her creatures held fast all round in orbit by the waves of gravitation, and the heaven above well-sustained in position, Vishnu, Lord immanent of the world, you maintain both of these and, of course, the divine word of the Veda. 
217 :Devasrutau devesvaghosatam praci pretam- adhvaram kalpayanti’urdhvam yajham nay atom ma jihvaratam. Svam gosthamavadatam devi durye’ ayurma nirvadistam prajam ma nirvadistamatra rametharh varsman prthivyah. 
218 :Scholars well-versed in the science of yajna go forward to the noble people and proclaim that they strengthen and extend the yajna over the earth and to the sky so that they receive, like the two fold movements of prana and apana, the fragrance of the yajna of love and non-violence and send it onward to the heavens. Take the yajna high, never take it down. Pious men of virtue stay in their home and look after the cows fully well. Abuse not life. Revile not the people. Enjoy life on the earth under the showers of peace and joy. 
219 :Let us celebrate the wonderful exploits of Vishnu who makes the threefold order of the heaven, the earth and the sky with the original materials of nature. Immanent with the later forms of the dynamic universe which He made and makes, He sustains the world. Celebrated in the hymns of the Veda, Lord, we worship you for the sake of the universal yajna of creation and pray for inspiration to perform yajna in our life. 
220 :Vishnu, Lord omnipresent of the universe, we worship you with yajna for the gifts of yajna. We pray: from the regions of heaven bless us with energy and light. From the vast sky and from the earth, and from the great womb of nature — the ‘mahat’ form of the creative mode — bless us and fill our life to the full with materials of joy and peace with both hands, from both sides, right and left. 
221 :Like an awful mountain lion that roams around in his sole majesty, Vishnu, the omnipresent Lord of tremendous power and glory rules the world and commands the homage of His creatures. All the regions of the world rest in the vast spaces of the three orders of His wonderful creation — the earth, the sky and the heavens. 
222 :The world is a manifestation of Vishnu’s glory at two levels of existence, the animate and the inanimate. The elements of existence have been integrated into form by the presence of Vishnu. The form is one, firm, inviolable and organismic. The world is divine, it belongs to Vishnu. It is yajna. It is for yajna in celebration of the maker. 
223 :In this world of Lord Savita’s creation and blessedness, with the double strength of Ashwini’s arms (nature’s powers of health, prana and apana) and the double gifts of nourishment from Pusha (earth’s powers of gravitation and stability), I accept and undertake to do yajna. Yajna is a noble work for humanity. With this, we can drive away the forces of evil even by the neck. It is great and growing. It is the voice of divinity loud and clear. Proclaim this great voice of truth for the glory of Indra, ruler of the earth. 
224 :Raksohanam balagahanam vaisnavim idamaham tarn balagamutkirami yam me nistyo yamamatyo nicakhanedamaham tarn balagamutkirami yam me samano yamasamano nicakhanedamaham tain balagamutkirami yam me sabandhuryamasabandhurnicakhaneda- maham tarn balagamutkirami yam me sajato yamasajdto nicakhanotkrtyam kirami. 
225 :Just as I perform, refine and expand this yajna — an act that gathers strength, bestows strength of power, prosperity and happiness, and destroys negativity and evil, an act performed with the voice of the divine (Veda) for the divine — just as I do the yajna, you too do the same for advancement. 
226 :What my dedicated friend or my chief assistant has done to dig up the vedi for knowledge of the earth, and as he has performed the yajna of research, so I do the act for enlightenment and you too do the same for progress. 
227 :What my equal or my unequal has done and does in the field of education, the same I do for development and you too do the same for refinement. 
228 :What the equal of my brother or the unequal of my brother has done and does for the advancement of the science of yajna, I do the same developmental act, and you too do the same — for expansion. 
229 :What my brother, colleague or another higher or lower has done and does regularly for heightening the possibilities of yajna for the advancement of knowledge, prosperity and happiness, I do the same inspiring act and you too do the same for the higher life. 
230 :You are self-disciplined, self-luminous, free, able to defeat the rivals. You are ruled by the sessions of the community-yajna; you shine in the community sessions and you suppress the proud. You are ruled by the people, you shine among the people, and you eliminate the wicked. You are ruled by all, you shine among all and you win over those who are not your friends. 
231 :You are the individual, self-disciplined, self- enlightened, free, able to defeat the rivals. You are the community, autonomous, enlightened, able to keep down the insidious. You are the nation, governed by the people, nationally enlightened, free, able to suppress the wicked. You are the united nations of the world, governed by the united people, humanly enlightened, sovereign, able to win over the opposition and non-friends. 
232 :You are fighters against suffering and destroyers of evil while I rout the force of the enemy. You are devotees of Vishnu, Lord of the universe, and dedicated to yajna, a life of positive creative and constructive action. I bless and sanctify you. You are the destroyers of the wicked. I gauge the strength of the enemy and drive them away from you, friends of yajna. You are fighters against human poverty and misfortune. I know the powers of the exploiters. I shower success and prosperity on you, friends of social and economic well-being through yajna. President of the council and master of yajna, you are crusaders against ignorance and injustice and you face the power of the adversaries. By virtue of your dedication to Vishnu and to yajna, I take you close to me for success. Eliminators of sin and pollution, you break down their power in the service of society. I know your faith and I strengthen your faith and resolve. Yajna is holy, it is a Godly mission. Stay firm in your dedication to yajna, to God, to nature and to society. 
233 :In this world of Savita’s creation, with the strength and vigour of prana and apana, and with the power and prowess of the bold and the brave I do homage to the man of learning and dedication and accept yajna as a mission so that I may catch the wicked and the evil by the neck and eliminate them head and foot from life and society. You are young and fast, speed itself. Drive away hate and fear from us. Eliminate poverty, adversity and failure. May all the people cooperate and join in the yajna in the search for the light of truth and universal Dharma, for exploration of the sky and space and for enrichment of the earth and the environment. This is the assembly of the wise and the learned people. May all the people join these men of knowledge and be enlightened. O woman, you are strong and bold. You too join in this venture. 
234 :Yajna, man of knowledge, president of the assembly, reach the regions of light and reveal the secrets of knowledge. Rise to the skies and fill the space there for knowledge. Reach into the earth and strengthen it. May the wind join you and help with the light of energy. May the two-fold movements of wind-energy, prana and apana, help you with their firm and unfailing power. I know and appreciate your dedication to knowledge and education, to governance and organization, to the economic system and wish you well. Promote knowledge, strengthen the social system, enrich the economic system. Promote life and health. Promote the welfare of the people. 
235 :Lady of the house, hostess of yajna, you are firm and strong. May the yajamana, your husband, also be firm in this yajna, in this home, in this world, with his family, his people and his wealth. May both of you fill the earth and the sky with the fragrance of ghee and fertility. You are the protective shade of Indra, lord of power and prosperity. You too be the protective cover for all the people of the world. 
236 :Lord President, adorable in songs of praise, may these chants of celebration reach you whole and from all sides, and may these praises, ever loved, increase and grow in their truth and value alongwith the lord, first in time and oldest in wisdom. 
237 :You are the life-link of the world’s beauty and grandeur. You are the centre-pin of the wheel of existence. You are the power and the glory. You are the ultimate rest and haven of the universe. 
238 :Agni, you are vast as space, flowing as a river and rolling as the sea, the fire that carries the fragrance of yajna across the world. You are the lord giver of knowledge and awareness and promoter of wisdom, and you are the vision of the world. 
239 :Agni, you are the lord of light, eternal poet of vision and creation, enemy of sin and evil, deliverer from bondage, protector from suffering, adorable, edifying purifier and sanctifier. Self-refulgent, you burn away the dirt, wash away and dry up pollution; centre- presence of the assembly, you emanate joy; light of the sky, you refine the yajna and carry it in space. Light of heaven and abode of the eternal law of Dharma, you are the spirit of patience and the power of endurance. 
240 :Samudro’si visvavyaca’ ajo’syekapad ahirasi budhnyo vagasyaindramasi sado ’si rtasya dvarau ma ma santaptam adhvanamadhvapate pra ma tira svasti me’smin pathi devayane bhuyat. 
241 :Agni, vast and deep as the ocean, unfathomable as space, immanent and omnipresent, you are the original power and motion of existence. Unborn and eternal, spirit of all knowledge, the world is but one vibration of this eternal consciousness, and the Veda is just one Word of its articulation. 
242 :Man of wisdom and learning, path-maker and guardian of advancement in knowledge, Dharma and science, Agni, Lord of Life, is the lord of knowledge and power. He opens the doors of internal and external knowledge. You too keep the doors open, extend the paths, do not cause any suffering, help us cross the hurdles and lead us on in this noble pilgrimage of divine life on earth. Lord of life, knowledge and action, bless us that we may succeed. 
243 :Mitrasya ma caksuseksadhvam agnayah sagarah sagard stha sagarena namna raudrendriikena pata ma’gnayah piprta ma’ gnayo gopayata ma namo vo ’stu ma ma himsista. 
244 :Men of knowledge, worthy of praise, broadminded as the sky, voracious as fire for knowledge and passionate for work, look at me favourably with the eye of friends. Remain broad-minded and liberal. Liberal and gracious as you are, protect me with the fiery passion for knowledge and power in growth and development. May the men of the fire of yajna and science fill and full me with plenty and let me grow in safety and peace. Salutations to you! Pray hurt me not, destroy me not. 
245 :Agni, you are the light of universal knowledge, a flame of fire for the scholars of the world to light up and reveal the form and structure of the world. Soma you are the vast power of order and control over the envious, the self-expansive servers of the flesh, the negative and uncreative people. May the lover of tecknowledge, fast and anxious, choose to dedicate himself to the great and valuable secrets and powers of agni, and know and confirm the divine voice of the Veda. 
246 :Agne nay a supatha raye’ asmanvisvani deva vayunani vidvan. Yuyodliyasmajjuhuranameno bhuyisthajh te nama’uktim vidhema. 
247 :Agni, light of the world and treasure-home of all the power and wealth, lord of all the knowledge, karma and paths of life, lead us on by the right path, simple and straight, to the highest goal of life, Moksha, through right knowledge, right action and right wealth. Fight out and ward off from us all that is evil and leads to suffering — crookedness, deviousness, intrigue and deceit. We bow in thanks and surrender to you and sing the sweetest songs in praise of you. 
248 :May this Agni, this fiery man of courage and prowess, make the way to safety, security, wealth and bliss. May he, breaking through the lines of the envious, go forward. May he defeat the enemy in battles and win the victories. May he, in joyous song, celebrate the victory for Agni. 
249 :Vishnu, lord of life and sustenance/Man of knowledge, power and wealth, go far and forward in your exploits and enable us to expand with our homes, wealth, knowledge and happiness. Born of ghee and rising with ghee the fire devours its food and blazes. You too light the fire with knowledge and action and grow continuously in knowledge, action, wealth and happiness. Take the master of yajna across the fields of life, chanting the hymns of yajna, to a safe haven of joy. 
250 :Deva savitaresa te somastam raksasva ma tva dabhan. Etattvam deva soma devo devam upaga ’ idamaham manusyantsaha rayasposena svaha nirvarunasya pasan muchye. 
251 :Savita, lord of life and growth, Head of the people, this is your Soma, honour, strength and power. Protect it. Don’t be cowed down. Let none injure, deceive or destroy you. Soma, man of energy and inspiration, shining with strength and intelligence, bright as you are, go to the men of virtue and wisdom. I too approach them to be with them. Thus with the wise and the virtuous people, with friends and comrades, with wealth and growth, I get free of the chains of Varuna, the powers of worldly bondage. 
252 :Ague vratapaste vratapa yd tava tanurmayya- bhudesa sa tvayi yo mama tanustvayyabhudiyam sa mayi. Yathayatham nau vratapate vratanyanu me diksam diksapati-ramamstanu tapastapa- spatih. 
253 :Agni, man of light and brilliance, man of truth, man of knowledge, teacher, man of discipline on oath as you are, so may I be as your disciple. Your body of knowledge, truth and faith may be in me too. And my body of growing knowledge may be in you. Man of discipline and commitment, you and I both shall observe common vows corresponding to each other. May my initiation and dedication on oath be accepted and approved by my master of initiation. May my discipline and austerity be in accord with the discipline and austerity of the master of tapas, austere discipline. 
254 :Vishnu, man of courage and knowledge wide expansive as the wind, equip yourself with the knowledge of science and technology and expand our comfort and happiness. Man sipping holy water just as fire consumes ghee and electricity in the sky consumes water in the clouds, drink deep at the fount of knowledge. Help the master of yajnato overcome the hurdles and swim across the seas with the chant of the Veda. 
255 :Agni/Master of knowledge, I won’t go to the fools. I would go to the others, to the wise, yes, to the wise only. You are higher than the highest (in knowledge), and closer than the closest (in love). I would be with you, know you, attain to you. 
256 :Lord/Master of herbs, brilliant and generous, we love you and adore you for the sake of gifts of knowledge and life’s inspiration. May all the devas, noble ones, love you and adore you for the same gifts of knowledge and blessings for the sake of Vishnu, lord of yajna. 
257 :Life-giving herbs, power of the lord, save this man, save this yajna, hurt not, kill not. 
258 :Dyam ma lekhirantariksam ma himsih prthivya sambhava. Ayam hi tva svadhitistetijanah praninaya mahate saubhagaya. Atastvam deva vanaspate satavalso viroha sahasravalsa vi vayam ruhema. 
259 :Don’t breach the regions of light, let the heavens be. Hurt not the skies, pollute them not. Be with the earth and the environment. This yajna is a great power, a weapon sharp and tempered, come to you for a great good fortune. Lord of herbs/Greenery of the earth, generous power of the Divine, grow from a hundred roots, spread and rise. We too may, by the grace of the Lord of yajna, grow and rise from a thousand roots, from a thousand shoots, through a hundred years, through a thousand years. 
260 :In this world of lord Savita’s creation, with both the arms of Ashwinis (the wind’s energy of prana and udana) and both the hands of Pusha (the earth’s gift of strength and prowess), I accept you and consecrate you, Head of the people and President of the assembly and your life-partner, in this social yajna. With this acceptance and investiture, I catch the evil and the wicked by the neck and destroy them. You are the power to join and disjoin. Remove the envious from us. Drive out all poverty and suffering from here. This is the august assembly of the noble people. May the noble people sitting in this assembly accept and consecrate you for the heavens (the light of knowledge), for the skies (internal purity of conduct), and for the earth (earthly prosperity and well-being). You are the centre- seat of the great and the noble ones. 
261 :You are the leader on top of all those taking this polity high. Settled with confidence in your Dharma, know well this polity, this economy, and the people. Savita, blazing lord of power, light and generosity, would shower His blessings and protection from above. May the Lord anoint you with honey and bless you with nectarious herbs. With top initiative, touch the heaven (in matters of justice and enlightenment). At the middle level, fill the sky with peace, security and Dharmic conduct. At the ground level, strengthen the earth (with food, planning and employment). 
262 :The houses of the government we would wish to visit are those which are bright with the light of Lord Vishnu’s glory of human art and awareness so that we exclaim spontaneously: “Ah! here is the place where the highest offices in Vishnu’s dispensation are wholly and exclusively held by learned and meritorious people”. I know your Brahma system of education and research, your Kshatra system of defence, justice and peace, your economic system of production and distribution. Strengthen and extend education and enlightenment, consolidate and advance governance and administration, improve and promote health and age, strengthen and expand the welfare of the people. 
263 :Watch the divine acts of Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the universe, acts of creation, sustenance and annihilation of the world, wherein are manifested the inviolable laws of His dominion operative in nature. Therein I see the sacred rules of conduct and administration of my dominion too and I bind myself irrevocably as a friend of the lord of universal power and as an instrument of His will. Watch, meditate, learn and bind yourselves too to the rules of this dominion and His. 
264 :Men of courage and divine knowledge, the Veda, always have a vision of that highest glory of Vishnu manifested everywhere and blazing like the light of the sun in heaven, which you too should see. 
265 :You are the centre of attraction, reverence and homage. You are the child of heaven like the sun. May the brilliant in knowledge and merit come to you in reverence. Yajamana as you are of the social yajna of this dominion, may the people of wealth all round be at your command in homage. The people of this land and the foresters are yours, so is the animal wealth of the land. 
266 :Close to the people, you are their protector. Brilliant in power and virtue, you are the destroyer of suffering. Just as meritorious people of quality and character approach the most lovable benefactors, so may they come to you. Abide in delight by your dominion and may the people enjoy what they offer for the social yajna and what they receive from it. 
267 :(People of the land), happy and prosperous, abide (by the law) and enjoy the good life. Brihaspati, master of knowledge and wisdom, teacher, accept the gifts offered by us. Take the brahmacharis. 
268 :You are an oblation for the Divine and the laws of universal truth in the yajna of education. I invest you with the bond of truth and the law of Dharma. Be a full man and be strong. 
269 :Devasya tvd savituh prasave ’svinorbahubhyam pus no has tabby dm. Agmsomabhyam just am niyunajmi. Adbhyastvausadhibhyo ’nu Ad math manyatamanu pitanu bhrata sagarbhyo ’nu sakha sayuthyah. Agmsomabhyam tvd justam proksami. 
270 :In this yajna of the creation of the refulgent and generous Lord Savita, with the arms of Ashvinis (powers and virtues of the sun and moon), and with the generous hands of Pusha (the fertility and sustenance of the earth’s gravitation and stability), I accept you, favoured as you are as a child by Agni, lord of light and heat, and Soma, lord of life and peace. I enjoin you to the discipline of brahmacharya with waters and herbs to enjoy and consecrate you, loved as you are by Agni and Soma. May your mother agree, your father approve, your brother support and your friends of the group cooperate. 
271 :You are a protector of the waters (through yajna). May all the living beings taste and enjoy the sweet and celestial waters and other things of their own like the blessed gifts from yajna. May you, with all your body and will, and by my blessings (i.e., the teacher’s blessings) help and cooperate with those who are dedicated to yajna. May your very breath rise with the wind carrying the fragrance. Be a master of yajna. 
272 :Anointed with ghee, both of you, the priest and the yajaka, protect and promote the animals. Betake yourself to the prosperous yajamana, perform yajna with oblations of rich materials and, joining the celestial wind like a friend, bring from the vast skies all that is loved and wanted by the yajamana. With your very heart and soul, be one with the body of yajna. You are the shower of joy through yajna, establish the yajamana in yajna, a very shower and treasure-house of joy. This is the divine voice. Chant the divine voice with the generous and the wise for the attainment of divine virtues. 
273 :Man of knowledge, promoter of joy, never be like a snake or violent as a hunter or tiger. Come irresistibly like a stream of ghee close by the path of truth and the law of Dharma. Salutations to you. Gifts of food and hospitality for you in plenty. 
274 :Women, pure and cool as celestial waters, marry by choice and settle with noble men in security and protection all round. So should we, men, settled and secure with the women, be their guardians and all-round protectors, in love and duty. 
275 :Vacam te sundhami pranam te sundhami caksuste sundhami srotram te sundhami nabhim te sundhami medhram te sundhami payum te sundhami caritrdhste sundhami. 
276 :I purify your speech, I purify your breath, I purify your eye, I purify your ear, I purify your navel, I purify your organ of generation, I purify your organs of excretion, I purify all your character and conduct. (Be a pure and complete person by education.) (Through education, study and practice) may your mind grow full and strong. May your speech be pure and perfect. May your breath be full and strong May your eye be clear and perfect. May your ear be strong and sensitive. Whatever be wrong and hurtful, that be cast out. Whatever be decided for sure that be accomplished. May everything be pure and strong and ever grow stronger. May all be peace and blessed day by day. Man of knowledge and science, save and strengthen this disciple. Spirit of knowledge, power and nourishment, save the inmate of the school, hurt not her/him. Save, strengthen, perfect. 
277 :Young man of education, the evil and the wicked, want, poverty, injustice and ignorance fall to your lot of responsibility. Say this and do this: “You are of the party of the devil. Off you go.” Be determined: Here I confront the anti-social devils. I neutralize them, drive them off and eliminate them. I send them to the lowest dungeons of the dark. 
278 :Seeker of discriminative knowledge, know the properties and behaviour of the finest materials and, with refined and rarefied vapours of ghee, fill the earth and the sky with waters. Let the scholars of science know the processes and results of your oblations in the yajna. Let the earth and the sky, replete with the vapours of ghee and waters sent up with the chant of vedic verses, send them onward to the winds (for the completion of yajna). 
279 :Whatever is despicable (in me), whatever is dirty (such as ignorance and illusion), whatever is wrong, false or anti-social, whatever execrable (I have uttered) toward the innocent, these waters may wash off that sin from me, the purifying wind may dry that off from me, the holy men of wisdom may absolve me of that and release me from self-bondage. 
280 :Young warrior, may your mind be full of strength and knowledge, and your spirit full of courage and high morale. You are a destroyer of the enemy. May the fire season and temper you, may the waters inspire you to the speed of the winds and the velocity of the sun-rays. Full of ardour and passion, send the enemy-army of crores into disarray. 
281 :Protectors and lovers of waters, protect and drink of the nectar of the waters. Protectors of homes and policy, protect the homes, and protect and benefit from the policy. Commander of the forces, you are the oblation of the defence-yajna rising to the sky for every warrior. Command the forces in the language of power for the defence of all the directions, interdirections, directions in front and back, and the directions of the target. Command others too so that they may also plan and conduct the defence with similar language and action. 
282 :Commander, you are the breath and spirit of divine power (Indra) throbbing in every part of the army. You are the current of passion and enthusiasm overflowing in every section of the force. Twashta, router of the enemy, brilliant and powerful, may your army of various form and formation march on as one body with one mark and one target. And while you march on your noble mission of defence, may your mother, father and other seniors, and your friends exhort you on your way and wish you all success. 
283 :Samudram gaccha svahantariksam gaccha svahd dev am savitaram gaccha svaha mitravarunau gaccha svahahoratre gaccha svahd chanddmsi gaccha svaha dydvdprthivi gaccha svaha yajham gaccha svahd somam gaccha svaha divyam nabho gaccha svaha’- gnim vaisvanaraih gaccha svaha mano me harddi yaccha divam te dhumo gacchatu svarjyotih prthivim bhasmana ’prna svahd. 
284 :Man of knowledge, in service of the government, with the knowledge of navigation and ship-building, go to explore the seas. With the knowledge of aviation, fly to the skies. With the knowledge of space and space dynamics, go to the brilliant regions of light. With the knowledge of yoga, explore the secret of the pranic energy of breath and vitality of the inner spirit. With the knowledge of astronomy, know the motions of the sun and planets and the formation of day and night. With the knowledge of grammar and versification, study, interpret and apply in practice the four Vedas. With the knowledge of geology and astrophysics, go deep into earth and space. With the science of yajna, know and practice the yajna of science and technology in the socio- practical economic and spiritual fields. With the knowledge of herbs, pursue the science of health and life. With the knowledge of water and gases, explore their celestial presence and formation of water and rain. With the science of energy, study heat, light, electricity and all-pervasive agni (fire), and harness it for use in life. Know all this, do all this, follow up all this and justify all that I have taught, to my heart-felt joy and satisfaction. Let the fumes and vapours of your yajna rise to the sky. Let the light of it reach the sun. Fill and cover the earth with the essence and alchemy of your yajna for valuable products. This is the divine voice. 
285 :Mdpo mausadhirhimsirdhamno dhamno rajamstato varuna no munca. Yadahuraghnya ’id varuneti sapamahe tato varuna no munca. Sumitriya na ’apa ’osadhayah santu durmitriyd- stasmai santu yo’sman dvesti yam ca vayam dvismah. 
286 :Head of the republic, pollute not the waters, destroy not herbs and trees: From this, from any other place, leave us not out, except no one from this. Let things like water and refreshment be available anywhere, everywhere. 
287 :Lord of justice, water, herbs and trees, cows are sacred, they are not to be destroyed: This you vouchsafe, we too take the oath. Back not out. We too will not back out. Under your governance, may waters and herbs be like friends to us. And they would be unfriendly to those elements which injure us and our sanctity, and to those ailments which we oppose, they would be enemies. 
288 :The waters are a blessing carrying the purity and joy of yajna. May the wind too bless us with the gifts of yajna. May yajna, non-violent, a very god of love and peace, overflow with life-giving fragrance. May the sun be replete and generous with the light and life of yajna. 
289 :Brahmacharini/s, unmarried graduands, I settle you in the home/s (refined and cultured with education and learning) of the unmarried graduate/s bright as Agni in marriage according to your own choice. You know the virtues and advantages of sun and fire. You know the properties of prana and udana (forms of pranic energy). You know the nature and learning of the scholars and you know the properties of the powers of nature such as earth and others. Be partners in their blessings in your life. And those who imbibe the virtues of the sun and whom the light and life of the sun has already blessed, we invite to grace this marital yajna of ours. 
290 :Hyde tv a manase tv a dive tv a suryaya tv a. Urdhvamimamadhvararh divi devesu hotra yaccha. 
291 :Brahmacharini, just as we perform the yajna in the company of our noble and learned men, so you too perform yajna with your man after marriage. We have taught you and we teach you for joy of the heart, for clarity of the mind, for the value of happiness and peace, and for the life and light from the sun, so you too, in the company of your man, send up your invocations and oblations of this auspicious yajna, so peaceful and lovely, for the sake of joy and enlightenment. 
292 :Soma (ruler of the republic), lord of majesty, stay close to the entire people and rule like a father. So should the entire people be close to you and grow like children of the father. Like the fire of yajna grown by samidha fuel, listen to my prayer, listen to the people. So may intelligent, educated and cool-minded women listen, like mothers, to the prayers of women. Man of reverence and wisdom, listen to our prayers like the yajnic chants of learned and faithful devotees. May Savita, lord of power and light, listen to my prayers and words of praise. 
293 :Noble and intelligent people, to one who, among you, is of good and constant character, strong of sense and will, happiest and most inspiring, like a wave on the ocean of existence, worthy of reverence and homage, defender and supporter of the virtuous, to him, for the gods among men, the noblest preservers, protectors and promoters of life’s vitalities, give your share of the social yajnic offering. You too are a part of the noble ones. Accept him in good grace with words of love and reverence — the one of you and for all of you. 
294 :You are the farmer. I exhort you to fill the sky with the vapours of water for the enrichment of the earth and the sea. With the oblations of herbs into the fire, get the herbs. With the oblations of water into the sky (through the fire) get the waters. 
295 :Agni, lord of power and virtue, the man you protect in battles and the man you send to the fields for farming, such a man gets lasting food and progeny. 
296 :In this world of Lord Savita’s creation, with both the arms of Ashvinis (power and vitality of sun and moon) and with both the hands of Pusha (the nourishing virtues of mother earth’s herbs), I accept you. You are the giver. In the service of Indra, lord and ruler of this land, with the best and most graceful words of piety, enrich and expand this non-violent social yajna of love and good fellowship, so deep and full with blessings, so generous with milk and honey, health and energy and the joy of life. You have heard the words of the wise. Worthy you are of acceptance and welcome. Come and give me the pleasure of fulfilment. 
297 :Mano me tarpayata vaca/n me tarpayata pranarh me tarpayata caksurme tarpayata srotram me tarpayatatmanam me tarpayata prajcah me tarpayata pasunme tarpayata gananme tarpayata gana me ma vitrsan. 
298 :People of the land, with your character and performance satisfy my mind with a sense of fulfilment. Satisfy me with your response to my words. Satisfy and fulfil my energy and ambition. Satisfy my eye that I see no wrong. Satisfy my ear that I hear nothing evil. Satisfy my soul. Satisfy my people. Satisfy my animals. Keep my subordinates happy. Let them not suffer any hardship and frustration. 
299 :We elect and appoint you for Indra, honour and glory of the land, for the creation of Vasus, young men of 24 years standing of education, and for Rudras, young men of 44 years education who can rout the enemy. We appoint you for the honour and glory of education and creation of Adityas, heroes of 48 years education and training who can shatter the pride of the enemies of the land. We accept and appoint you for the force of eaglelike commandos of defence, for the lovers of peace and good health, for the development of energy and electricity and for the producers of wealth and prosperity. 
300 :Soma, blessed lord of the land, the light of your power and glory shines over the earth, in the sky and in the heaven above. By virtue of that, and for the sake of this generous man of yajna of the social order, make it richer, expand it further, and proclaim: He shall grow happier and more prosperous. 
301 :instant in action like thunder in the clouds, life-partners of your men, be strong, join the men in this holy yajna and take it forward to the heights. Invited to the vedi, have your fill of the immortal drink of soma, the nectar of life and joy. 
302 :Woman, wise and intelligent, fear not, nor tremble; take heart and be bold of heart and soul. You being strong and standing by your husband, both of you collect strength and firmness of body, mind and soul. Eliminate evil and sin, and shine happy and blessed like the moon. 
303 :Mother, all your children and others, keen to make you feel happy and comfortable, may run to you eagerly from east, west, north and south and all round. Love them, protect them, and may they too know you, be with you, and love you well. 
304 :Dearest Indra, brilliant and generous, lord mightiest of power and wealth, truth, honour and glory, there is no one else other than you to love, appreciate and approve the human being, no one more compassionate and more gracious than you to vouchsafe for man. I say this for truth — it is the very word of yours ! Be pure for the Lord of Divine speech, purged as you are by the rays of the sun and the moon, two arms of the Creator whereby He showers life with vitality and purity. You are a part of the brilliant and the generous, a darling of the gods. Be pure for them. 
305 :Madhumatirna’ isaskrdhi yatte somadabhyam nama jagrvi tasmai te soma somaya svaha svahorvan ta riksamanvem i. 
306 :Soma, Lord of knowledge and vitality, bless us with honey-sweet food and energy. Lord of inspiration, great, universal and imperishable is your name. To that name, to the Divine Word, to the universal acts of the Divine, and for the sake of knowledge, good action and honour, I dedicate myself to the universal presence of the Divine. 
307 :Man, bright and virtuous, with all your earthly but excellent and celestial senses, you are self-made, self-existent and autonomous. Bless you with a pious mind and the voice of divinity, the Veda. Light of the Spirit, of auspicious birth, your life is dedicated to the Lord of Light, mother-powers of nature, and all the noble servants of the life-divine. This is why I praise you. May this praise come true. With one blow of truth from above, the evil is destroyed. You are for the breath of life, for vitality, joy and virtue. 
308 :Man, you are the power and the glory of the self, placed and accepted in the law of existence. Preserve and promote the inner life and dedicate the innermost self to the Law of the Divine. With yoga, eliminate suffering and grow, and obtain the higher wealth and power of the soul. 
309 :Man of power and glory of the self, in pursuit of yoga, I place the heaven and the earth within you, and the vast intervening spaces of the sky too. Friends with the noblest powers of nature and humanity, rejoice within by yourself in a state of divine bliss and spread the joy around. 
310 :Man of yoga, of noble birth and noble life, self- existent and self-made, endowed with all the wonderful powers of sense, blessed be your mind with the voice of the divine, the Veda. I consecrate you and dedicate you to the love and service of all the noblest powers of earth and heaven, to the lord of light and the protectors and servants of the light and life divine for the attainment of the higher life. 
311 :Man of yoga, self-existent and free with excellent powers of sense, of noble birth and noble living, blessed be your mind with the divine voice, the Veda. I consecrate and dedicate you to the love and service of all the noblest powers of earth and heaven, to the lord of light, and the servants and protectors of the light and life divine, for the attainment of the higher life. 
312 :Vayu, preserver, protector and promoter of purity, yogin, versatile master of all virtue, loved, adored and cherished by all, strengthen and edify us with a thousand noble virtues. I come up to you for the sumptuous food of yoga with insatiable appetite — for the gift of that power and vision of the spirit which our forefathers attained and which you have attained and preserved. 
313 :Indra and Vayu (teacher and student of yoga), you are like the sun and pranic energy. These essences, joys of spiritual experience, distilled from the soma of yoga, are anxious to reach you. Come by these, come to us. Disciple of yoga, accepted you are in the discipline of yoga for success like the wind. Yoga is your home alongwith Indra and Vayu (power of the mind and purity of the soul). You are the favourite of both Indra and Vayu. With the love and power of these two, I love you too with reverence. 
314 :Mitra and Varuna, practitioners of yoga, seekers of the law of universal truth and the existence of the Universal Spirit, both of you dynamic in action like prana and udana energies of the breath of life, the Soma of your search, the joy of successful yoga, is realized. Here, then, listen to my praise and accept the homage of an admirer. 
315 :Yajamana, master of the yajna of yoga, accepted and sanctified you are in yoga in the discipline of yama and niyama (social and personal ethics of purity). With your realization of the powers of prana and udana, I do reverence and homage to you. 
316 :Noble men of discriminative knowledge and wisdom, let us rejoice on wealth fit to be offered to the gods for food, rejoice just as cows enjoy the green grass. 
317 :Teachers and students of yoga, friends like pranic energies, both of you attain and preserve for us the voice of divine knowledge, Veda, versatile and eternal giver of universal knowledge, revealed in the state of Samadhi. 
318 :Yajamana, this knowledge is your element, your very home of existence. We do homage to you along with the seekers of divine law through yoga. 
319 :Teacher and seeker of yoga, bright as Ash wins (sun and moon), advance your yajna of yoga in the light of the divine voice of the Veda, so sweet, so true, so inspiring. 
320 :Seeker of yoga, sanctified in the discipline of yama and niyama (social and personal ethics of purity), this yoga is your element, your very home of existence. 
321 :Teacher and seeker, with your control over the vital energies of prana and apana, and for the sweetness and light of your spiritual awareness, we do reverence and homage to you. 
322 :Yogi, established you are in the rules of yamas and niyamas, the discipline of social and personal purity. This is your natural element, a very home and blessed state of being. 
323 :Cleansed of ignorance and suffering, peaceful at heart, you explore, follow and advance in that state of yoga which, like that of the ancient Rshis and yogis old and new, is supreme, powerful, instant and victorious, remover of negativities, shaker of sin and giver of strength, and which is the light residing in the deepest cave of the heart. Man of love and peace, protect this state of strength and purity invincible for yourself. And may the powers of the divine, saviours and protectors of life and energy, be with you and lead you on. 
324 :You are good and bold, make others good and bold, and come to the yajamana with all the wealth and honour. Going forward in harmony with the earth and heaven, shining bright and virtuous as by the light of the sun, drive out the dark, attain peace of mind, and be the haven and life-support of the creative and purifying energy of humanity. 
325 :Acchinnasya te deva soma suviryasya raya- sposasya daditarah syama. Sa prathama samskrtirvisvavara sa prathamo varuno mitro ’ agnih. 
326 :Seeker of yoga, cool and excellent, bright and brave, we are the generous source, givers of continuous undisturbed stream of the wealth of life and yoga to you. May that first original and universal culture of life bless you. May the teacher, bright as Agni, deep as the ocean, and benevolent as the sun be your foremost friend. 
327 :The first friend, master of knowledge, worshipper of the Divine Voice, Veda, is Brihaspati, lord of the power and vision of yoga. For him and in his honour, speak the most sacred words and offer him the sweetest distilled soma. Go to him as you approach agni, the sacred fire, and in the spirit of yajna treat him with the most wanted, most loved, most cherished offering with the utmost courtesy and respect in words of the highest reverence. 
328 :This ruler of the republic, like the bright moon in the womb of the vast space covering other lights in the celestial regions, inspires and moves about in orbit majestically, powerful as the sun in the battle of the waters. Men of knowledge and wisdom advise him with the gift of knowledge and policy just as freely as a teacher teaches the disciple. Accepted (by will), consecrated (through yajna), positioned in the laws and structure of the republic, we accept and honour you for the defence of the society and elimination of the enemies. 
329 :Mano na yesu havanesu tigmam vipah sacya vanutho dravanta. A yah sarydbhistuvinrmno’ asyasrinitadisam gabhastavesa te yonih prajdh pahyapamrsto marko devastva manthipah pranayantva-nadhrstasi. 
330 :Ruler and Head of the republic, lord of power and wealth, this land and its governance is your haven, the very meaning of your existence. 
331 :The enlightened ruler and the people, both dynamic and intelligent, working at the speed of the mind, sharp as an arrow and strong as adamant, think hard and plan for the nation. In the light of his glory shining in all directions and under the protection of the fighters of this man of a mighty host working at his command, they shine in peace and bum in war. 
332 :Protect and serve the people. Free of the enemies as you are, may the divine powers who protect the brave help and lead you on. Be invincible. 
333 :Just and enlightened head of the nation, enlighten the people as reborn, and shower the yajamanas of this social and development yajna with all-round wealth and nourishment. Dynamic and inspiring, going along with earth and heaven in harmony, with the light of discrimination, you are the ideal and ultimate resort of the enlightened. And by the dazzling brilliance of your discrimination, the enemies are overthrown. 
334 :Eleven vital powers are there above, existing by their own virtue (prana, apana, vyana, udana and samana, naga, kurma, krikala, devadatta and dhananjaya: these are the vital pranic energies, and the eleventh is the soul). There are eleven on the earth existing by their own virtue (earth, water, fire, air and space: these are the elements; sun, moon, nakshatra ahankara, mahat and prakriti: these are objects and modes of nature). There are eleven in the vital energy (prana), existing by their own virtue (ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hands, legs, two organs of excretion, and mind: these are organs of perception and volition). May all these powers of life and nature join and contribute to this common yajna of the ruler and the people. 
335 :You are accepted, sanctified and positioned in the laws and structure of this social yajna of the nation. (By virtue of your political wisdom and humility) you are the first and best oblation of this social yajna, self- sacrificing promoter of thought, science and economy. Protect and advance this yajna. Support and advance the yajnapati, men of law and justice, polity and economy. Protect and advance Vishnu, man of science and spiritual knowledge, and may Vishnu strengthen you with the virtues of mind and character and advance you in social and economic progress. Protect and promote all the creative, constructive and productive activities of this national yajna. 
336 :Soma flows. Soma flows and is purified. Soma is purified and is offered for sacrifice. So does the ruler flow, issues in action, and, through action, is purified, sanctified, self-sacrificed. 
337 :The ruler is sanctified and dedicated to the Brahamana sub-system (learning, education and research), to the Kshatra sub-system (defence and governance), to the devoted yajamana, participant in the creative activities of the system, for food and energy, for waters, herbs and vegetation, for earth and heaven, for good life and conduct, for all the noble people of the land. 
338 :Ruler of the nation, this life, this land, this sociopolitical system is your haven and your justification. You are accepted, sanctified and honoured for all the noble people. 
339 :Indra, meritorious man of arms, self-controlled and established in the rules of law, good conduct and service of the nation, I appoint you as commander of the army in the service of Indra, lord of the land — great is he, long-lived he be! Great is your work, a lifetime undertaking. For that you are appointed. For Vishnu, lord supreme, for yajana, for the nation you are consecrated. For the lord’s songs of praise, to the noble people, to the health and continuance of the social yajna of the land, to the defence and advancement of the noble powers, you are dedicated. This is now your haven, your very being, the meaning and justification of your existence. 
340 :Head of the council, protector of the good and the noble people, I select you for the progress of this social yajna (from agnihotra upto the governance of the land) for the noble people of love, friendship and knowledge. 
341 :Protector of the men of knowledge, I appoint you in the service of Indra, the ruler, man of power, majesty and grace, for the advancement of this social yajna of unity and cooperation. 
342 :Man of science and technology, protector of higher and astral sciences, I welcome you for the progress of this technological yajna for the realization of the power of heat and light. 
343 :Man of science and industry, protector of the men of scientific and industrial enterprise, I sanctify you for the promotion of the yajnic realisation of electric and water power. 
344 :Teacher and man of education, promoter of education and yoga-vidya, I consecrate you for the promotion of social and ethical education as a yajna for the improvement of administration and the collective yoga of ethical governance of the land. 
345 :Man of knowledge, friend of the spiritual people, I dedicate you to the advancement of the sacred yajna of moral and spiritual values for the realization of Divinity and knowledge of the shastras. 
346 :Men of knowledge (of defence science) study and light the fire — refulgent and universal presence, forehead of the light of heaven come down to join the earth with its properties, born of the truth and force of the universal law and reality, given to the comfort and joy of the world, a guest of honour for all the people, source of power for industrial enterprises, the light that reveals everything to man. (Light the fire, use it for defence and progress). 
347 :Lord of power and glory, Soma, Lord Creator and giver of peace and joy, you can be reached through the discipline of ‘yamas’ and ‘niyamas’, rules of social and personal ethics ranging from love and non-violence to total surrender to you. You are firm, inviolable base of the stability of the stars and planets, firmest of the firm, most imperishable of the imperishables (i.e., above the original prakrti and the souls). This universe and the laws of existence are pervaded by you — they are like your universal home. Life and light of the world, Lord of peace and joy, firm and eternal, to you, with a mind of inviolable faith, in words of sincerity, we surrender in obedience and homage. Lord of power and glory, let our people be free of all enemies, let our nation be of one and equal mind. 
348 :Yaste drapsa skandati yaste ’ aihsurgrdvacyuto dhisanayorupasthat. Adhvaryorva pari vet yah pavitrattam te juhomi manasa vasatkrtam svaha devanamutkramanamasi. 
349 :Host and master of yajna, whatever part of yajna offerings goes over the earth and to the sky with the wind, and whatever part gone up from the sacred lap of the earth and the womb of space is released from the clouds, and whatever part goes up from the hota and the adhvaryu (the priests) and proclaims the virtues of the performance, all that, in words of truth, with sincerity of mind and honest conviction, I say, comes to bless you. All the devotees of yajna and men of learning and wisdom rise in lustre and look up to you. 
350 :Pranaya me varcoda varcase pavasva vyanaya me varcoda varcase pavasvodanaya me varcoda varcase pavasva vace me varcoda varcase pavasva kratudaksabhyam me varcoda varcase pavasva srotraya me varcoda varcase pavasva caksurbhyain me varcodasau varcase pavetham. 
351 :Lord and giver of the light of life, bless me with the light of knowledge and sanctify the pranic energy of my heart. Lord and giver of lustre, bless me with the glow of health and nourishment and energize the vyana vitality of my body. Lord and giver of vigour, bless me with the passion for action through the udana energy in my mind. Lord and giver of the force of truth and conviction, bless me with the courage of conviction and the power of speech. Lord and giver of the ambition of enlightenment and strength of the spirit, bless me with the light of self-knowledge and brilliance of intelligence. Lord of omniscience and giver of speech, bless me with the revelation of the voice divine and consecrate my ear. Lord and giver of light and beauty (like the sun and moon), venerable teacher of the teachers, bless me with the celestial vision of the eyes to see and reveal the beauty of the mystery of existence. 
352 :Atmane me varcoda varcase pavasvaujase me varcoda varcase pavasvayuse me varcoda varcase pavasva visvabhyo me prajabhyo varcodasau varcase pavetham. 
353 :Lord and giver of the light of the soul, bless me with the light of the soul and awareness of the self. Lord and giver of the brilliance of personality, bless me with the light of knowledge and power of yoga. Lord and giver of life, bless me with the glow of health and gift of longevity. Lord and giver of brilliance, and you, teacher and seeker of brilliance, both of you, bless the entire people with the strength and ambition to be great and glorious. 
354 :Who are you? Which one (in rank/position) are you? Whose (son/appointee) are you? What name are you, the name by which we would know you, and the one we would serve with sumptuous entertainment on soma? I love and want the beauty of the earth, the vastness of the sky and the light of heaven. I want to have many noble people by the people. I want to be a great hero of heroes by the heroes. I want to be well- provided, with nourishments (of the land). 
355 :(I am none by myself alone, I am one and many at once, by virtue of the people.) rcfmmri j j hi sTh% rcfidmnW hi mrW^lHisirT redMiiiitd^chslTr Lord/People of the land, accepted, sanctified and positioned you are in the laws and the structure of the land. Therefore I/we accept you for the month of Chaitra, for the month of Vaishakha, for the month of Jyeshtha, for the month of Ashadha, for the month of Shravana, for the month fo Bhadra, for the month of Ashwina, for the month of Kartika, for the month of Marga-shirsha, for the month of Pausha, for the month of Magha, for the month of Phalguna for the defence and security of the power and safety of all (within the laws of the state through monthly meetings of the Head of the state and the representatives of the people). 
356 :Ruler and the Councillors, both brilliant and powerful as Indra and Agni (power and fire), come and, with words of enlightenment, create for us the wanted joy and prosperity. With your knowledge and mind, and our suggestions and request, guard this land and protect the prosperity of the people. 
357 :People of the land/Ruler and the Councillors, accepted and positioned you are in the laws and constitution of the state. You (the people) are dedicated to Indra and Agni (the ruler and the council), and accepted in law. You, the ruler and the councillors, are dedicated to Indra and Agni, Lord of Power and knowledge, and Lord of the people and the land. This constitution and this land is your mainstay, the meaning and justification of your being and position. 
358 :The scholar councillors light the fire of scientific yajna and, working in proper form, cover the sky with fragrance (machines and missiles). Youthful and friendly is their ruler who is accepted and honoured in the land for his qualities of Dharma, knowledge and man- management. President and ruler, this land and its governance is your mainstay and you are here for the service of Indra and Agni, power and enlightenment of the people. 
359 :Men and women of learning and wisdom, best minds of the land, supporters and protectors of the people, generous benefactors of the generous givers, come to this yajna of education and receive this child for instruction. 
360 :Young learner, you are initiated and consecrated in the discipline of this sacred institution by the venerable teachers. This institution, these teachers, this programme, this now is your home and life. You are dedicated and committed to the service and support of the good and the enlightened people with reverence. 
361 :Learned and wise people, come and sit on this seat, and listen to my prayer. 
362 :Young learner, you are accepted and consecrated in the rules of this institution by the learned teachers. This is now your home. You are dedicated to the support and service of the good and the wise in faith and reverence. 
363 :Glorious ruler of this noble and powerful people, support, protect and advance this yajna of education in this world as you have already tasted the sweets of your efforts in this field. Hero of the land, dedicated people of vision, poets and scholars of yajna, follow your policies and enjoy your protection under your benevolent rule. Accepted and consecrated you are in the laws of this land for the glory of the nation and the welfare of the people. We dedicate you to the glory of the nation and welfare of the people. 
364 :We, men of vision, poets and scholars, call upon and praise you for new modes of defence and protection, Indra, glorious ruler of the land, leader of a great people, first and best of all, dynamic and progressive saviour against suffering and evil, celestially virtuous, able administrator, formidably patient, nobly passionate, inspiringly courageous. 
365 :Ruler, you are accepted and consecrated in the rules and structure of the state for the glory of Indra and Maruts, glory of the land and welfare of the people. 
366 :This land and its protection, now, is your home and justification. We dedicate you to the glory of the land and the welfare of its people. We accept and honour you, a man of law, discipline and commitment as you are, for the strength and glory of the people. 
367 :Man of love for all, joy and power, Indra, commander of the army, attended with forces swift as the wind, scholarly, fearless and brave, destroyer of the enemy, wipe out the enemy host, eliminate those who destroy happiness and cause suffering to mankind, and make us free and fearless from all sides. And, just as the sun pours out the waters when it breaks the cloud Vritra with the winds and drinks to the health of the earth and her people, so do you drink with your friends and allies to the joy of Soma and success. 
368 :Accepted and consecrated you are in the rules of the army and the laws of the land. I appoint you in the service of the lord of the land and head of her people. Now the rules, the law, the army, defence of the land and freedom of the people: this is your home and haven, the very meaning and purpose of your life. You are consecrated and dedicated to the people and the lord of the land. 
369 :Marutvah’ indra vrsabho randy a piba soma- manusvadham madaya. Asincasva jathare madhva’ urmim tvaih raja’ sipratipatsutanam. Upayamagrhito ’ sindraya tva marutvata ’ esa te yonirindraya tva marutvate. 
370 :Indra, head of the council/commander of the army, leader of the people/army, first and best among all, you are a man of honour and power. For joy and for the battles, drink soma according to your taste and capacity with every meal. Stimulate your appetite with draughts of the best and the choicest sweets of juices. You are intelligent and brilliant for every occasion of importance. 
371 :Accepted and consecrated you are in the laws of the land and rules of the council/army. We honour and celebrate you in the service of the lord of the land and head of the people. You are dedicated and committed to the honour of the land and the welfare of the people for the development of airy weapons and missiles (marut- weapons). This commitment, this dedication, now is your haven, the very meaning and purpose of your existence. 
372 :Lord of the universe, you are great and adorable, compassionate and so close to humans, giver of bliss to the people, lord of knowledge secular and sacred, of unique power, infinite, more expansive than space, omniscient knower of us all, just and kind with those who do good. We grow and rise in strength, power and prowess and honour only with His grace. 
373 :Lord of light, you can be realised only through the rules of yama and niyama and the discipline of yoga. He resides in the light of the heart. For the realisation of the glory of that light we worship Him. For His Greatness we worship Him. 
374 :The Lord is great, Lord of power and glory who, like the cloud laden with rain, showers the worshipper— who sends up his songs of praise natural as a child’s— with light and lustre. In the light of that glory, we grow in body, mind and soul. 
375 :Lord of us all, you can be reached only through the discipline of yoga. You reside in the light of your glory revealed in the heart. We worship you for the realization of that glory, for the attainment of that infinite love and compassion. 
376 :Just as the rays of the sun carry the light of the sun to the world to reveal the glory of the sun for all to see and realise, so do the manifestation of the Supreme Light and Spirit reveal the glory of the Lord for all to see and realise the presence of the power and the spirit. 
377 :So also do the words of the Rishi reveal the truth of existence and the glory of the creator to help us realise the presence of the Lord of Creation. 
378 :There arises the sun, wonderful splendour of the gods, the light and eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni, filling the earth, the sky and the heaven with its glory, and soul of the world moving and unmoving. This is the divine voice. This is the oblation for him. 
379 :So is the Lord Creator and Supreme Spirit of the universe, the light of lights, life of life and the real power of the gods. That alone is the object of worship. 
380 :Agne nay a supatha raye’ asman visvani deva vayunani vidvan. Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno bhuyistham te nama uktim vidhema svaha. 
381 :Agni, Lord of light and knowledge, you know all the paths of the world into the treasures of wealth, (the science of yoga also). Take us, lead us on by the right path to the wealth of life, and remove from our heart all the sin and evil. We sing in praise of divine glory in all humility from the core of our heart. Bless us with success in Dharma, artha, kama and moksha through yoga and the divine voice, the Veda. 
382 :May this warrior, agni, clear the path for us. May this warrior, breaking through the enemy lines in front, advance on and on. May this one, fighting in the thick of battle, win the battles one after another. And may this one win the victory over the enemies and rejoice. (May one look after the wounded and treat them with medicine.) With a descerning eye, I see the various grades of ability among you. The one who knows you all and knows the world may form you into different classes and councils for appropriate jobs. The highest in intelligence may touch the skies — realise the divine presence and the eternal values of life and action. Ruler of the people, with the members of the council, by the path of truth, act and move on. Men of golden generosity, go ahead on the path of Dharma with charity. (The ruler should constitute three councils: The Council of Education, Vidyarya Sabha, The Council of Governance, Raj ary a Sabha, and the Council of Dharma, Dharmarya Sabha, to assist and advise him in the governance and administration of the country.) I go and meet a Brahmana, a virtuous man of divinity and divine knowledge, of illustrious parentage with a heart of parental love, venerable man of vision and discrimination who has realized the soul of the Veda-mantras, a man of real gifts of gold — generous, obliging, giving, redeeming all those who reach him. 
383 :Go to the generous man of knowledge, wisdom and virtue, give freely, and the gifts will turn to blessings and come back to you to enrich your soul. 
384 :discrimination, assign me to a teacher of Vasu’s standing of 24 years so that I become a Vasu brahmachari (graduate) of agni’s brilliance and have the joy of scientific truth and reality. May health and longevity come to the giver, the teacher. May comfort and prosperity come to the receiver, the disciple. 
385 :discrimination, assign me to a teacher of Rudra’s standing of 44 years so that I become a Rudra brahmachari (graduate) of Rudra’s justice and power and have the joy of eternal knowledge of the world and heaven. May the strength of pranic vitality come to the giver, the teacher, and a life-time of health and prosperity to the receiver, the disciple. 
386 :May Varuna assign me to a teacher of the Aditya order of 48 years standing so that I become an Aditya graduate of Brihaspati’s knowledge of the Vedas and have the bliss of eternal vision of life. May the sensitivity of tactual and all other senses come to the giver, and the eternal joy of life and vision come to the receiver, to me. 
387 :May Varuna assign me to a preceptor who has, through yoga practice, transcended the ups and downs of worldly existence so that I realise in practice the pleasures of home-life and their value against a comprehensive picture of life and death and attain, through living, the eternal ananda of Moksha. May divine realisation come to the giver, the preceptor, and the joy of life and ultimate bliss of eternity come to the receiver, to me. 
388 :Who gives? For whom ....? Desire gives. Gives for desire. Desire is the giver. Desire is the receiver. It is all desire. Love for you! For fulfilment. 
389 :Who gives the fruit of karma? To whom does the giver give the fruit of karma? Ishwara, Divine love and desire, gives the fruit of karma. He gives the fruit of karma to the jiva, the soul, who desires and acts the karma. Ishwara is the object of love and desire for the yogis. He is the giver. The jiva desires and acts out of desire. He is the receiver of the fruit. It is all desire. This is for you — the knowledge. It is for you to know. (You cannot live without desire, and you cannot survive only with desire. Integrate desire (kama) with Dharma and Artha, and you’ll have both life and freedom (moksha). 
390 :Young man, Brahmachari of the Aditya order, selected and accepted by me for marriage, you are now bonded and consecrated in the sacred code of marriage for a life-time. Observe the rules and discipline of wedlock according to the Dharma-shastras meticulously like the sun through the zodiacs in the year. Noble in nature, culture, habit and conduct, this home, the life of grihastha, is your paradise to live in and grow. Preserve it, protect it, and let nothing violate or destroy this sweet life and home. 
391 :Dear husband, man of excellence and power, wealth and generosity, you are never dry or stingy or non-obliging. You are always and readily with the generous Giver. Your gifts in cash and kind, instruction or advice, multiply and mature in no time and may they come to me too! I dedicate myself to you for a life-time year after year. 
392 :Aditya, man of brilliance and discipline, you are never funny or neglectful. Bright, generous and holy, superior in wisdom and character, you are doing full and fair justice to your life both present and future, just as you would do to the transcendent state of your mind and consciousness. If your sex-life and your mind and senses are stable under control, free from indulgence, you will enjoy the supreme bliss of happiness in a state of enlightenment. Man of light and virtue, I accept you and dedicate myself to you for a lifetime. 
393 :The home-yajna of a noble husband and noble wife brings joy and grace of the gods to the family. Noble and brilliant people of wisdom and virtue, be kind and and bless the home with peace and happiness. May your wisdom, auspicious and blissful, which gives the knowledge of right conduct and behaviour, come hither and always abide with us to guide us and protect us from sin and evil. I accept you for dedication to the noble and the brilliant people for a life-time. 
394 :Brilliant young man, settled in this new home with your wife, after leaving the ‘gurukul’, the school- home, this family home is the yajna-vedi of your grihastha where you will drink the ‘soma’ of joy for a long long time. Man in this home life should observe truth of word and conduct to make the married life happy and successful. The home in which the husband and wife observe the ethics and discipline (Dharma) of marriage is blessed with wealth, growing prosperity and the birth of a noble and virtuous son who helps and protects his parents and fulfills their wishes. 
395 :Lord Savita, creator of this wonderful world of joy and beauty, create for us a life of joy, joy today, joy to morrow, and joy from day to day so that, doing good actions, with our intelligence we may enjoy a happy and prosperous family life in this home. 
396 :Accepted you are (as me) and consecrated in the ethics and discipline of matrimony (grihastha dharma). A devotee you are of Savita, creator of the universe, and so gracious a giver of food and the wealth of life. Give me the food for life and joy. Promote yajna, promote the master devotee of yajna, for wealth, for honour and generosity, for the grace of Savita, lord of generation — for health, wealth and procreation — for you and me. 
397 :consecrated in the sacramental law and discipline of marriage and firmly settled in a beautiful home. Healthy, virile and handsome, salutations to you and good food and drink. This home, this family, is now your haven for life, the meaning and purpose of grihastha. I dedicate you to all the noble people of the world and to all the godly powers of nature, yes to all the great and noble people. 
398 :Upayamagrliito ’si brhaspatisutasya deva soma ta’ indorindriyavatah patnivato grahah’ rdhyasam. Aham parastadahamavastadyad- antariksam tadu me pitabhut. Ahatn surya- mubhayato dadarsaham devanam paramam guha yat. 
399 :Accepted and consecrated you are (along with me) in the matrimonial Dharma. Noble man of peace and brilliance, happy at heart, blest with wealth of men and material, son of a mighty vaidic scholar, and blest with a noble wife, I pray I (we) abide by the vows and promises of wedlock and grow stronger and more and more dedicated. And may all that is upfront and present and may come hereafter and all the knowledge and wisdom and all the mysteries hidden deep in the mind of the saints and sages, may all this, like a father, nourish my mind and soul. And with all this knowledge and all their blessings, may I, both of us together, realise the presence of the light of life, the Supreme Soul of the universe, here and hereafter. 
400 :Manly man of a darling wife, lord of brilliance and joy, come and, with the inspiring poetry of Veda in honour and praise of the Creator, and eliminater of suffering, Twashta, drink the elixir of life with me. Husband of an admirable wife, virile and generous like the rain-god cloud, lover and guardian of people and children, rain the shower of life and joy on me. Replete with the seeds of life, sow the seed in me. Would-be father of your child, virile and lustrous, I shall receive and hold the seed and bear your son and spirit — the Lord bless him — as brave and lustrous as you. 
401 :Accepted and consecrated you are in the sacramental dharma of marriage and the household, carry on the business of the home like a leader, using all the resources with joy and satisfaction to everybody. Drive on this chariot of grihastha with the steeds of Indra (i.e., men and materials) for the glory of Indra, Head of the universal family. Manage your horses (resources) and ever be strong, drinking the joy of life to the honour and glory of the Lord of Bliss (Soma). 
402 :Invited by you, blessed soul, to the celebration of your power of horses, your wealth of land and cows, and your culture of the divine voice, the Veda, admirer of the Rks, lover of the Yajus and singer of the Samans, I am delighted to enjoy what you have so generously offered. 
403 :You are the redeemer from the sin committed by the generous superman; you are the saviour from the sin committed by the ordinary person; you are the redeemer from the sins committed by the forefathers; you are the redeemer from the sin committed by one’s own self; you are the redeemer from the sins begotten of sin. Whatever the sin I have committed in a state of knowledge, or I have committed in a state of ignorance (or I might commit in future), you are the saviour from all that. 
404 :Twashta, refiner of manners, behaviour, method, and culture and generous giver of health, wealth and knowledge, let us go forward with a noble mind, able body, plenty of food and drink and the vigour and lustre of life. Give us all-round wealth of life, and whatever is wanting in us in health of body and mind, be gracious to make up and complete. 
405 :Samindra no manasa nesi gobhih sam suribhinnaghavant sam svastya. Sam brahmand devakrtam yadasti sam devanam sumatau yajmyanam svaha. 
406 :Indra, Lord of power and honour, Maghavan, Lord of wealth and knowledge, take us forward in a healthy state of mind and sense at peace, comfortably, with men of wisdom and brilliant intelligence, with the vaidic voice of universal knowledge, and with our cows, into the way of whatever is nobly done in the vaidic tradition of universal values, and whatever is good according to the noble genius of the superior people of yajnic dedication and culture. 
407 :Follow as we do the noble genius of superior people among us, bless us Twashta, remover of the veils of ignorance and giver of knowledge. By the bright day and in the night, with the help and guidance of healthy and intelligent scholars and sages, and with the gift of a noble mind and concentration, bless us with the wealth of life, knowledge, wisdom, health and culture, and cleanse us of all the negativities and impurities of body and mind. 
408 :Men and women of household, maintain the culture and institutions of the family, give peace and comfort to all, produce wealth for prosperity, look after your children and others, protect and promote wealth and knowledge, be brilliant and victorious, eliminate darkness with light, create joy and happiness around, expand your noble presence through noble works, and, through charity and generosity, through good manners and good deeds, enjoy life with your family and friends. Create wealth with good work and keep it for the yajamana, the host-organizer of yajna. 
409 :Auspicious powers of nature/ Noble men of brilliance, wisdom and generosity, efficient in creation, production and management, conducting, maintaining and enjoying this social yajna of production and prosperity, we have created and obtained these comfortable homes and valuable materials for you. Take these and hold these for us for onward creation and comfort. 
410 :O brilliant and generous Lord of yajna, Agni/man of knowledge, inspire to high acts of dharma and yajna all those who come to your house anxious to receive higher wealth and virtue. 
411 :Men of the household, all of you, eating and drinking, enjoy the sacred voice of divinity, the food of yajna and Dharma, the spirit of life and the bliss of heaven on earth. 
412 :Agni, man of knowledge and brilliance, we, the house-holders in this family yajna of the household going on here, we select and accept you as the priest (to conduct and guide it). Expert man of yajna, knowing the spirit and essence of it, come close, join and enrich this yajna which is the creator and giver of prosperity. And not only join and conduct, but also come again and be blest with peace and prosperity. 
413 :Man of the household, brilliant and generous, knowing the nature, properties and movements of the dynamic earth, having known the movements, know further and go further, and deeper inside it know the wealth and attain prosperity. 
414 :Man of the household, brilliant and generous, master of your sense and mind, with the voice of the Veda and virtuous action, bring yajna into the practical scientific acts of life and hold on to the yajnic way of living. 
415 :House-holder, man of yajna, with the voice of the Veda and virtuous acts of dharma, do the yajna of hospitality to the learned. Observe the collective yajna of loyalty and reverence to the head of the nation. Be true to your inner self. 
416 :House-holder, observer of the ritual and the social yajna, this household yajna of yours, performed with the hymns of the Veda, inspiring to the young heroes of the nation, is for the safety and education of the people. Observe it with the voice of truth and justice in the business of the nation. 
417 :Ruler and President of the Council, be not angry and poisonous as a snake, nor ferocious as a serpent. Be not false, hurtful and heart-breaking in speech. Be a ruler shining brilliant, supreme in virtue. Do excellently as behoves your chosen status. Make the highways of justice broad in honour and worship to the sun, the supreme light of the world, for all to see and follow the light so that none may stray into the paths of evil. Let the rule of law and the penal code be as firm and inviolable as the chains of Varuna and the thunderbolt of Indra. 
418 :Agni, brilliant and generous house-holder, enter the flames of fire and the depth of waters and know their secrets of power. Protector of the waters, digging into and protecting the material wealth of the earth and ocean, go from house to house, and light the fire of material knowledge of energy and its applications. Let the tongue of the truthful man taste the sweets of life and proclaim. 
419 :Yajnapati, pursuant of yajna, we put your heart and mind in touch with vital energies and dynamic modes of social conduct and behaviour revealed in the hymns of the Vedas dealing with foods, source materials, and yajnic cooperation of the community. Let your searching mind go deep down into the ocean and rise up into the waters of space. And then celestial waters and rejuvenating herbs would emerge into your mind’s eye of discovery (for common good). 
420 :Women, bright, educated and meritorious, this grihasthashram, sacred family-home, is your real world of existence. Keep it, maintain it, manage it well with love and competence. 
421 :Noble man of peace, love and honour, this family- home is your intimate world of existence. Find peace and fulfilment here. Keep it, maintain it. Guard it. Guard it all-round. 
422 :Initiated and consecrated couple in grihastha, gentle, noble and lovable virtuous producers of wealth, you are one of the bright, meritorious and generous community. You are an instrument of the devas. 
423 :Deva, lord of the bright and the generous, living with the noble ones and the ordinary people, I pray, that I keep away from any sin or misconduct or misbehaviour committed with the mind and senses, or with the body, or by the ordinary people or even by the superior ones. Save me from violence to Dharma — such violence is the root of all sin and crime. 
424 :May the foetus of the tenth month stir with its membrane-cover just as this wind moves, just as the sea moves. And may this foetus of the tenth month be born (safe and alive) with the membrane cover. 
425 :Dear wife, for whom your sacred foetus is meant, for whom the pure and perfect womb of yours is meant, by that mother — you partner — may I beget a child with full and perfect limbs of the body through the sacred procreative yajna. 
426 :The man of mighty deeds, who eliminates suffering and creates joy, of versatile attainments, bright and honourable, constant and resolute, should wait for the great new arrival. 
427 :Men of the household, cultivate the vaidic culture of one, two, three, four and eight steps of attainment: one: Aum; two: worldly fulfilment and the freedom of moksha; three: the joy of the truth of word and the health of body and mind; four: the attainment of Dharma, wealth, fulfilment of desire, and moksha; eight: the joy of all the four classes and all the four stages of life (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha and Sanyasa). Build homes for the people and advance in life. 
428 :Married couples, brilliant and great in many ways, blest with beauty, wealth, yajna and knowledge, wherever in a home you find superior people of noble nature, character and action, that family is most dedicated to mother earth and the Veda. 
429 :Married couples, you are like the vast and brilliant sky and the rich, fertile and forbearing earth. Bless this home-yajna of our grihastha with all the joys and fill this home with nourishment and familial support of the community. 
430 :A tistha vrtrahan ratham yukta te brahmana harl. Arvacinam su te mano grava krnotu vagnuna. Upayamagrhito ’ slndraya tva sodasina ’ esa te yonirindraya tva sodasine. 
431 :Man of the household, destroyer of the enemy, come and sit in this chariot of grihastha in which are yoked two ‘horses’, Draw and Hold (attraction and preservation or yoga and kshema). And if your mind sometime is down, then, with the voice of the Veda bring it up to peace, stand as a rock, and shower like a cloud with joy. You are accepted and consecrated in the matrimonial dharma for the sixteenfold honour and glory of life. This grihastha is now your haven. You are given up and dedicated to this sixteenfold programme of the family life. 
432 :Indra, hero of the household, man of honour and protector of your happy home, yoke your horses of beautiful hair, strong and fast, shooting to the destination And then listen to our voice and act accordingly. 
433 :You are accepted and consecrated in the sacred discipline of marriage for the sixteenfold honour and sanctity of life in marriage. This grihastha is now your haven of existence. You are dedicated and given up to the sixteenfold programme of family honour. 
434 :Two horses (yoga and kshema) carry Indra, hero of inviolable honour and power and head of the nation- family. Indra, protector of the honour of the land, listen to the Rishis’ songs of the praise of the heroes, go close to the yajna-assemblies of the people, listen and act accordingly. 
435 :You are anointed and consecrated in the sacred law and constitution of the land for the sixteenfold honour and glory of the nation: This honour and glory now is your haven of life, the very purpose and meaning of your office and existence. The people look up to you for the sixteen-fold honour and prosperity of the nation. 
436 :None other ever existent is beyond Him, Him who pervades and transcends all the worlds of the universe. Father of His creation, ever rejoicing with His children, Lord of sixteen powers, full and complete, He illuminates the three lights of the world and reigns — the One sole and absolute Lord existent, omniscient and blissful. (The three lights are fire, electricity and the sun. The sixteen powers are: will, energy, faith, earth, water, fire, air, space, sense, mind, food, vitality, austerity, Word, life (jiva) and language). 
437 :Indra, the sovereign, reigns supreme over all. Varuna, the ruler, rules in specific areas. Those two first I eat my share of the food after those two. Both of you, the people and the government, with the sacred voice of the Veda which reveals the secrets of living together in love and cooperation, be happy and prosperous with full vigour. 
438 :Agne pavasva svapa’ asme varcah suviryam. Dadhadrayim mayi posam. Upayamagrhito’ - syagnaye tva varcasa’ esa te yoniragnaye tva varcase. Agne v arc asv inv arc asvahs tv am deve- svasi varcasvanaham manusyesu bhuyasam. 
439 :Agni/Ruler, lord of knowledge and power, you are noble with noble actions, first among all of noble achievement. Purify us, and bless us with lustre, noble vitality and prowess, wealth and good health with nourishments of body and mind. 
440 :Noble ruler, accepted you are and consecrated in the laws and constitution of the nation for the honour and brilliance of the people and the land. This honour and prestige, the nation, is now your haven, the reason and justification of your being. We dedicate you to the achievement of honour and glory. 
441 :Agni, lord of light and brilliance of action, you are lustrous and honourable among the brilliant and the generous rulers. I pray I be brilliant and honourable among the people. 
442 :Indra, ruler of the land, lover and achiever of honour, rising in lustre (with the strength of body, mind and soul and the power of the council and the army), having drunk the soma of victory over the enemies, shake the visors of your helmet with joy and self-esteem. 
443 :Accepted you are by us for the governance and administration of the nation, and consecrated you are in the laws and constitution for the achievement of light and glory like that of the sun. This consecration now is the home and haven of your life, the very meaning of your existence. We dedicate you to the light of the world, the sun, and the glory of the nation. 
444 :Lord of the land, brilliant in knowledge and justice, most shining you are among the noble and the generous personalities of the country. I pray that I may be brilliant and most shining among the people. 
445 :Just as the bright rays of light (fire, sun, and electricity) shine on things to show them to the world, similarly, I pray, I may see the people and other things in the divine light of the Lord. 
446 :Accepted and sanctified you are in the rules and laws of the land to shine in the business of the nation like the sun. This is now your haven and home. You are dedicated to the Sun, Lord Supreme of the universe, to shine in life. 
447 :Ruler of the land, bright and sunny in knowledge and justice, you are the brightest among the brilliant. I pray I may shine the brightest among the people. 
448 :Just as the rays of the sun carry the light of the sun for the world to see the sun, surely so the lights of creation and the eyes of the seers reveal the light of the Lord Creator, refulgent and omniscient of all that is born, for the world to see. 
449 :Lord of the universe, you are acceptable, and perceiveable through the discipline of yama and niyama and the inner eye, for the realisation of your glory and universal presence. This universe is your home of presence and we dedicate ourselves to you for the attainment of your glory and the Light of Life. 
450 :Generous and venerable as mother earth, come, fill the pitcher and smell it to taste. May sweet juices come to you in plenty and fill the home. Versatile in virtue, rich in food and overflowing with milk, come again and fill us with vigour and energy. And then, again, with your love and grace, may I be enriched with the wealth of life. 
451 :the divine worthy of praise, love abiding in the heart, libation for the gods and fragrance of yajna, love and desire incarnate, beauty of the moon, brilliance of virtue, unbreakable and boundless, inexhaustible stream of knowledge and generosity, forbearance of mother earth, celebrity of the world: these are your names, dear wife, inviolable, which describe woman’s nature and character. Speak to me of the good things I ought to do. 
452 :Indra, commander of the army, destroy our enemies, keep the enemy hoards down. Him who wants to beat us into slavery, throw down into the dark. 
453 :Accepted you are by the people and consecrated in the rules and tactics of the army for the defence of the land and destruction of the enemy. This is now your haven and home, the sole purpose of your office. We dedicate you to the defence and security of the land and to the honour of the nation. 
454 :To-day, for our defence and advancement in yajna (and battles of life), we invoke (call upon) Vishwakarma, lord of speech and knowledge, lord of all actions and dharmas, universal benefactor and lord of noble performance, in action, hitting the mark fast as the mind. May he listen and accept all our prayers and offerings and come for our protection and support. 
455 :President of the council/commander of the army/ man of yajna/head of the family, accepted and consecrated you are in the rules and discipline of life in the service of the lord of action and lord of glory, for the people and the land. This service, this yajna, this action, is now your haven and home, the very meaning and purpose of your life. We dedicate you to the service of the lord of glory, the lord of action and progress. 
456 :Vishvakarma, lord of all actions and dharmas, with vitalizing materials of yajna, strengthen the ruler and make him an invincible protector of the people. Let him grow mighty with ample means and materials. To him, the people, as taught by the forefathers, bow in homage. 
457 :Ruler, president of the council, accepted you are by the people, and consecrated in the laws of the land for service to the lord of action, Vishwakarma, and honour of the nation (Indra). This service and this honour now is your haven and home. You are dedicated to the lord of action and dharma and the honour and glory of the nation. 
458 :Vishvakarman : Accepted and honoured you are in reverence as a teacher. Enlightening are your songs of praise in the Anushtubh metre. Scholar of Gayatri verses, I come to you to learn the science of fire. Master of Trishtubh verses, I come to you for the secrets of life’s glory and prosperity. Scholar of Jagati verses, I come to you to learn the nature, character and actions of the noble, brilliant and generous leaders of the world. 
459 :Dear husband, if amongst the pure and spotless people, you ever happen to waver, I shake you out of that fickleness. 
460 :If amongst the gentle folk in speech and language, love and manners, you happen to falter, I shake you out of that embarrassment. 
461 :If amongst the graceful and the beatifying, you happen to err toward roughness, I shake you out back into self-awareness. 
462 :If in the company of the rejoicing folks in festivity, you waver from self-control, I shake you out back to temperance. 
463 :If amongst the sweetest and the most lovable folks you waver from decency, I shake you back to civility. 
464 :You are pure and immaculate. I would always warn you against going astray and urge upon you to stay untainted in character as the day in the rays of the sun. 
465 :The excellence of the man’s image shines everywhere. Bright and generous, purest of the pure on top, noblest of the kind and beneficent, first among the great leaders of men, joyous and gracious, the glory of your name and reputation is irresistible. It is for that I accept and elect you. For that dedication of yours to the Lord of light and grandeur, blessed man, all hail and success to you! This is the divine voice. 
466 :Usik tvam deva somagneli priyaih patho’plhi vast tvam deva somendrasya priyam patho’ pihyasmatsakha tvam deva soma visvesam devanam priyaih patho ’pihi. 
467 :(Ruler and president of the council), brilliant man of peace and honour, loving and lovable, be sure you follow the path of love and greatness shown by the learned and the wise leaders. 
468 :controlled, be sure you follow the path of love and greatness shown by the leaders of power and prosperity. 
469 :Brilliant man of knowledge and grace, friend of ours, be sure you follow the path of goodness and virtue loved by the noblest and the wisest men of the world. 
470 :Here in the home is love and joy. Live and rejoice. Here is constancy and autonomy. Be here with self- control and self-dependency in truth of word and deed. 
471 :Beget a child for the mother, and may the child sucking the mother, growing up among us, create wealth and provide nourishment and hold it for us all in truth of word and action. 
472 :You are the wealth and abundance of yajna- session. Let us, through this session of yajna, expand over the earth and rise above to reach the lights of heaven and attain to immortality. Let us arise and reach the regions of space to get super-terrestrial knowledge and bring the joys of heaven on earth. 
473 :Yuvam tamindraparvata puroyudha yo nah prtanyadapa t ant ami ddh at am. Vajrena tantamiddhatam. Dure cattaya chantsad gahanam yadinaksat. Asmakam satrunpari sura visvato darma darsista visvatah. Bhurbhuvah svah suprajdh prajabhih syama suvira viraih suposah posaih. 
474 :You two, commander and personnel of the forces, front-line fighters, attacking as lighting and defending as rock, whosoever attack us with his army, destroy him with the thunderbolt. And if the enemy force happen to contact us, arise with force and drive them off. Valiant hero, all round destroyer of the enemy, eliminate our enemies totally from the face of the earth. On the earth, in the sky, in heaven, anywhere, let us be strong in manpower with brave people, heroic with noble heroes rich in food, energy and materials, with plenty of good food, energy and materials. (Let us be well-provided: justify our existence, defend our self-awareness and culture, and work for universal happiness.) P a r am e s thy abhidh it ah prajapatirvaci vycihrtayamandho’ acchetah. Savita sanydm visvakarma diksdyam pus a somakrayanydm. 
475 :(What is the secret of happiness?) Prajapati, father of His creatures, self-existent in eternal bliss, and self- revealed in the divine voice of the Veda, worshipped in meditation, good food honestly and amply obtained, Savita, creator of life realized in truth, Vishwakarma, maker of the world and lord giver of science and technology, at heart, through all our commitments to life and dedication to duty, and Pusha, giver of health and vitality thanked in herbal treatment, all this with you, and happiness is assured. 
476 :(Know the powers of nature, what has been realized or ought to be realized by learned men) for practical projects : Electricity, earth power, wind, steam and cloud so close, magnetic energy that sustains the worlds together, universal pranic energy, the unifying universal soul immanent in humans and other creatures enveloping the whole creation — all to be researched and realized with reverence, faith, love, and the investment of mind, energy and money — (powers for power, and soul for value). 
477 :Conducted by scientific logic, carried through special experiments, and seated in special cars, Soma, wealth of energy, power and prosperity, has arrived. Varuna, mighty water power, is here. Agni, heat energy, is come in special fuels. Indra, electricity, is here potent in yajna materials. Atharva, special energy, has arrived. 
478 :Learned and wise scholars of the world, the energy stored in particles and radiated in the sunrays, which is a preservative power and source of comfort (Vishnu), the explosion of energy from the sun (Yama), the cosmic energy being created constantly (Vishnu), the vibrations of pranic vitality (Vayu), generative particles of matter and energy (shukra), and the pure seeds of life (shukra), anyone who explores and analyses these is blest with the secrets of life’s existence and nourishment. 
479 :Learned, wise and generous people of the world, those who raised the libations in the ladles for the fire and sent up the fragrance to the clouds, who dedicated and raised their mind’s energy for sacrifice and service, who respected and served life as sacred, who spoke in praise of the divine omnipresence of the all-seeing eye of the Lord of existence, who enjoyed the soothing touch of the air around and received the food sanctified by yajna, they are the noble and brilliant ‘devas’, learned and parental seniors, and reverential friends of humanity. 
480 :Hosts and participants of yajna who dig, design and construct canals for sacramental bath, who launch upon the sea for voyaging, who fill the sky with yajna vapour, who stabilize people and their regions with their power and lustre, who are most heroic with exploits of their superior prowess, who are men of constancy and forbearance, who are unostentatiously social and universally friendly : these venerables are invited and welcomed by people. Meet them. Those who do so are happy and fortunate. 
481 :Devan divamagan yajnastato ma dravinamastu manusyanantariksamaganyajhastato ma dravinamastu pitfn prthivimaganyajnastato ma dravinamastu yam kaih ca lokamagan yajnastato me bhadramabhut. 
482 :Yajna rises to the heights of heaven and reaches the ‘devas’, the powers of light, and may I, from there, receive the light and wealth of knowledge. 
483 :Yajna rises to middle regions of the clouds and reaches humanity, and may I, from there, receive the gifts of material wealth. 
484 :Yajna goes over across the earth and the seasons of nature through the year and reaches the senior and fatherly people, and may I, from there, receive the comforts of the seasons and the blessings of the seniors. 
485 :pray, I may receive the gifts of the true, the good and the beautiful. 
486 :Thirty four fibres (eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, Indra, Prajapati and Nature) join, weave and extend this yajnic web of creation, and feed it with materials. And where nature leaves off, there, surely, I take it on with the truth of word and action. And, I pray, this yajna reach the devas, the learned and the wise. 
487 :The gifts of yajna spread out in many ways. They expand in all the eight directions and reach the heights of heaven. 
488 :That same yajna may bless my people with great wealth and nourishments. And may I, with sacred speech and good acts of Dharma, enjoy the blessing of a full and happy life. 
489 :Soma, man desirous of the honour and joy of life, man of gold, speed and brave heroes, dedicate yourself to yajna, treasure-home of universal nourishment, cows and self-control over mind and senses. Cleanse yourself, cleanse the environment, and enrich the world. 
490 :Deva Savita, lord of life, light the yajna (of Raj Dharma), consecrate and promote yajna, inspire, consecrate and promote the yajnapati (ruler of the land) for honour and prosperity. Brilliant sustainer of the earth, lord of the divine voice, purifier of intelligence, purify and inspire our intelligence with the divine voice of Veda. Generous purifier of food, purify and consecrate our yajnic food and taste it with favour and pleasure. 
491 :Dhruvasadam tva nrsadam manahsadam- upayamagrhlto ’slndraya tva justam grhnamye- sa te yonirindraya tva justatamam. Apsusadam tva ghrtasadaih vyomasadam-upayamagrhlto slndraya tva justam grhndmyesa te yanirindraya tva justatamam. Prthivisadaih tva’ntariksa- sadam divisadam devasadam nakasadam- upayamagrhlto ’ slndraya tva justam grhnamye- sa te yonirindraya tva justatamam. 
492 :Ruler of the land, firmly settled (with knowledge, humility, yoga and Dharma) among the people, in their heart and awareness, you are accepted and consecrated in the rules and discipline of the state for the honour and prosperity of the people. Loved and thus accepted, I accept and elect you. This office now is your very life and purpose. Most highly loved and respected, you are now dedicated to Indra, honour and prosperity of the people. 
493 :Ruler of the country, saddled with the management of water, food (milk, ghee and other nourishments), and aviation, you are accepted by the people by virtue of your discipline and respect for law and constitution of the nation for the defence and honour of the people. Loved and respected thus, I accept and elect you. This office now is your very life and existence. Most highly loved and respected, you are now committed to the honour and glory of the nation. 
494 :President of the nations of the world, committed as you are to the earth and its environment, to the skies, to exploration of space, powers of nature and the brilliant people, and the freedom and happiness of humanity, you are accepted and consecrated by the people of the world in the universal Dharma and nation’s law for absolute freedom and prosperity of the people of the world. Accepted, loved and respected thus, I accept and elect you. This office and its Dharma now is the very meaning and purpose of your existence. Most highly loved, respected and elected, we commit and dedicate you to the honour and prosperity of humanity and to the glory of the Lord of the universe. 
495 :For the sake of Indra, lord of glory, and for you, I take the life-giving essence of the waters (juices) collected and ripened in the sun. And I take the finest essence of the essences of waters and hold the quintessence of vitality for the glow of health and life. 
496 :By virtue of your discipline and values and the means at your command, you are accepted and consecrated for the sake of honour and prosperity of the nation. Loved and respected as you are, I accept and elect you. This choice and consecration is now your haven and home. Most loved and respected, you are now committed and dedicated to the glory of Indra and his people. 
497 :Graha ’ urjahutayo vyanto vipraya matim. Tesam visipriyanam vo ’hamisamurjam samagrabham upayamagrhito ’sindraya tva justam grhnamye- sa te yonirindraya tva justatamam. Samprcau sthah sain ma bhadrena prhktam viprcau stho vi ma papmana prhktam. 
498 :Men and women of the land, who have collected strength and energy from yajna-ahutis and knowledge from the Vedas, communicate with the intelligent and the inspired people and share with them the common wisdom. For you and the dear members of their community, I have procured ample food and energy. 
499 :With means and materials for the nation, you are accepted and consecrated in the laws and values of the nation for the honour and prosperity of the people. Loved of the people and favourite of the Lord as you are, I accept and elect you. This nation and this choice now is your haven and home. Most loved and honoured, you are now totally committed and dedicated to Indra, lord of the people, the land and the world. 
500 :Ruler and the people, remain united for good work. Join me to goodness and prosperity. Stay away from evil, both of you. Keep us away from the evil- minded. 
501 :Indrasya vajro ’si vajasastvaya ’yam vajam set. Vajasya nu prasave mataram mahimaditirh nama vacasa karamahe. Yasyamidam visvarh bhuvanamavivesa tasyam no devah savita dharma savisat. 
502 :You are the thunder-bolt of lightning for the enemy. This man, the commander/ruler would plan and win the battle with you, the thunderous hero. In the business of the battle we sing songs of praise, in noble words, in honour of the mother, the great earth, one and indivisible. On the earth where this whole world finds its haven and home, on that same earth, we pray, Lord Savita, creator of the world, may establish the rule of universal Dharma for us. 
503 :There is nectar in the waters, there is vitality of health and longevity in the pranas. There is magical drug power in the waters, top efficacy by which horses become coursers flying like feathered arrows. Sacred waters, may this man, ruler of the land, by virtue of your fertile waves, moving fast and lofty, provide the land and people with wanted food and energy. Men and women of the land, with your power and prowess, fast, lofty and tempestuous like the waves of the sea, with the vitality of your pranic energy, and the fertility and efficacy of the waters, be fast, passionate and ambitious for the honour and progress of the land in war and peace both. 
504 :Twenty-seven gandharvas (universal wind, the mind and five main pranas, five subpranas, five organs of sense, five organs of volition, and five subtle elements) these possess and operate with speed in nature. May these bless this man, commander of the forces, with speed. 
505 :Vataramha bhava vajinyujyamana ’indrasyeva daksinah sriyaidhi. Yuhjantu tv a maruto visvavedasa ’ a te tvasta patsu javatn dadhatu. 
506 :the speed of wind, be efficient and expert, concentrative in the service of the nation, move and achieve honour and glory as that of Indra, lord of the world. May the Maruts, universal winds (men of encyclopaedic knowledge), and Twashta, lord of refinement and sophistication (the specialist) inspire your feet with instant speed of motion. 
507 :Javo yaste vajinnihito guha yah syene paritto ’ acaracca vate. Tena no vdjin balavan balena vajajicca bhava samane ca parayisnuh. Vajino vajajito vajam sarisyanto brhaspater- bhagamavajighrata. 
508 :Man of power and speed (Vajin), man of knowledge and ruler of the land, the speed and passion that’s deep in your heart, that’s entered in the wings of the eagle and in the velocity of the wind, by that speed and passion, man of power and prowess, be the victor of battles, and through fight and struggle, cross the sufferings of life and the land. 
509 :Warriors of the land, fighting and doing your duty in the service of the protector of a great people, winning battles and achieving plenty and prosperity, taste the fragrance of the sweets of life. 
510 :Devasyaham savituh save satyasavaso brhaspateruttamam nakam ruheyam. Devasyaham savituh save satyasavasa’indra- syottamain nakam ruheyam. Devasyaham savituh save satyaprasavaso brhaspateruttamam ndkamaruham. Devasyaham savituh save satyaprasavasa’ indrasyottamam ndkamaruham. 
511 :In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of light and life, may I ascend to the highest heaven of freedom, knowledge and divine realization by the grace of Brihaspati, great and inviolable lord of truth and existence. 
512 :In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of light and life, may I ascend to the highest heaven of freedom, justice and prosperity by the grace of Indra, inexorable lord of truth, justice and magnificence. 
513 :In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of light and life, I have risen to the highest realization of freedom, knowledge and divine presence by the grace of Brihaspati, great and generous lord promoter of truth and existence. 
514 :In this yajnic creation of glorious Savita, Lord of light and life, I have risen to the highest realization of freedom, justice and prosperity by the grace of Indra, generous and unfailing Lord promoter of truth, justice and magnificence. 
515 :Brihaspati, leader and master of knowledge and enlightenment, fight and win the battle for knowledge and education. Teachers and scholars, proclaim, speak and teach the language of knowledge for the ruler, and help him to fight and win the battle. 
516 :Indra, ruler, leader and admirer of knowledge and enlightenment, fight the battle against ignorance. Scholars and teachers, proclaim, speak and teach the language of enlightenment for the ruler and make him win the battle for education. 
517 :Men bright as sunbeams, this national language of yours should be true, good, common and one by which Brihaspati, ruler of the great land and leader of education and enlightenment may win the battle of unity and education. Men of plenty and abundance, cooperate and help Brihaspati win the battle and free the nation from ignorance, disunity and suffering. 
518 :Men bright as sunbeams, the language of yours should be true, good, common and one by which Indra, lord of national glory, may win his battle. Men of plenty and abundance, cooperate and help Indra win the battle and free the nation from ignorance and suffering. 
519 :In the world, the cosmic yajna of Savita, Lord of light and life, the great lord creator and promoter of truth, Brihaspati, victor of wars I wish and pray I may win the battles of life. 
520 :Great warriors, winners of battles, stem the routes of the enemy’s advance, and, crossing leagues of virgin territory, spread over the directions. 
521 :Just as that horse, tied neck, flanks and mouth, still galloping past the distance-marks and hurdles on its course, carries the rider to the battle, similarly this warrior, in spite of all the hurdles in his path, passionate and impetuous in the business (yajna) of battle, commands his soldiers in the sacred voice of truth, to pounce upon the enemy. 
522 :The warrior who, like a bird on the wing, eager, hastening, pressing on, sweeping, and pouncing upon its prey like an eagle, presses on the flanks of his flying horse, and sweeping on and closing upon the enemy, exhorts his cohorts with passion in the true voice, wins the battle. 
523 :Passionate but controlled, brilliant, esteemed and well-maintained warriors with their horses, swift in action, seizing by the neck the serpents, wolves and demons of the society, be good and auspicious to us, saving us from social pollution and giving us lasting peace and security in the noble men’s yajnas and battles of life for development and progress. 
524 :Men of knowledge, wisdom and vision, dynamic and self-disciplined, expert men of a thousand themes and subjects, who have heard and meditated on the shastras, who deserve,desire, offer and receive their share in the national yajna, may all listen to our suggestions and prayers in national projects and may promote and maintain our great wealth and honour. 
525 :Heroes of the land, defend us in battle after battle. Men of virtue and wisdom, free and immortal in nature and character, visionaries of eternal truth and universal law, protect and promote us in our wealth and honour, drink of the nectar sweets of this life to your heart’s content, rejoice, and, by the paths of the noble and the great men of the world, go forward. 
526 :A ma vajasya prasavo jagamyddeme dyava- prthivi visvarupe. A ma gantam pitara matara cd ma somo’ amrtattvena gamy at. Vajino vajajito vajam sasrvahso brhaspaterbhagama- vajighrata nimrjanah. 
527 :May the knowledge of the Vedas and shastras come to me. May the knowledge and wealth of the boundless forms of earth and heaven come to me. May the fatherly and motherly seniors bless me. May the secrets of soma herb with the gift of health and longevity open to me. Heroes of the land, victors of wars, tempered and purified, fight the battles and do your part of service and honour to Prajapati, great lord and guardian spirit of this earth. 
528 :For comprehensive knowledge, honest work; for universal happiness, virtuous action ; for sure success, relentless effort; for creative intelligence, ceaseless study; for the expression of knowledge, living language; for lord of the day, sun, astronomy; for the glorious dawn of the day, science; for the self-deluded fool, words of warning; for the self-destructive mean, reformative advice; for the earthly born eternal soul, vision of reality; for vision of the Lord of the universe, divine intelligence; for honour to the President, language and manners of protocol. 
529 :May your life grow strong and stable by yajna, obedience to Ishwara; may your vitality grow stronger by yajna, pursuit of knowledge; may your eye grow in vision by yajna, right seeing; may your ear grow in hearing by yajna, hearing the sacred voice; may your faculty of enquiry grow efficient by yajna, mutual dialogue; may your yajna — reverence, society and charity — grow by yajna, performance in action. 
530 :May we continue to be the children of Prajapati, father of humanity (and of the ruler of the nation). May we become noble and virtuous and attain eternal freedom, happiness and immortality. 
531 :May our mind and perception, power and force, be for you and yours for us; all our wealth, thought and action, brilliance and achievement be yours, and yours for us. Reverence to the mother earth. The wealth and glory of the earth is yours for the mother. You are for the mother, for farming, for protection and growth, for production of wealth, for health and nourishment. You are the leader, disciplined controller, firm and constant, support of all, for the mother. 
532 :This illustrious creator of the food of yajna, the Sun, first generated the shining soma, vitality, in the herbs and waters. May these waters and herbs be honey- sweet invigorating for us and we remain wakeful and watchful in the front ranks of the realm with noble speech and virtuous acts. 
533 :The illustrious generator of the food of yajna fills the heavens and all the regions of the world with light and therein abides. That glorious lord/ruler, knowing well the evaders of oblations/taxes, makes them give/ pay their share of the yajna/social yajna of the land. 
534 :Vajasya nu prasava a babhuvema ca visva bhuvanani sarvatah. Sanemi raja pariyati vidvan prajam pustim vardhayamdno ’asme svaha. 
535 :The illustrious creator of the food of yajna pervades all the regions of the world/land wholly and from all sides. That lord/ruler, master of eternal knowledge, increasing and promoting the material wealth and human resources (people) of the nation provides total protection all round. 
536 :Let us, in truth of word and deed, follow the ruler, man of auspicious virtue, sun-like brilliant scholar of the Vedas, guardian of the noble seniors of wisdom, and aditya-brahmacharis of 48 years, and, by the grace of Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the world, let us begin the action. 
537 :O ruler, for the sake of growth with creative contribution to life and happiness (dana), in truth of word and deed, and as a matter of principle and policy: protect, promote and exhort Aryama, the man of justice, Brihaspati, the man of knowledge, and Indra, the man of honour and prowess. Protect and promote the study of sacred literature and language of knowledge. Advance the man of universal honour and recognition (Vishnu). Protect and promote women of knowledge and vision (Saraswati). Honour the brilliant man of light and creativity (Savita), and recognize and encourage the man of instant response and swooping action (vajin). 
538 :Lord of the land/world, Agni, be kind and generous to us and, in truth of word and thought, give us the message of knowledge and wisdom for all. Vanquisher of a thousand adversaries, you alone are the generous giver of wealth. Be gracious, lord, and bless us with all we need for fulfilment. 
539 :May Aryama, man of justice (Kshatriya) give us justice for all. May Pusha (Vaishya), producer of food and wealth, give us food and prosperity. May Brihaspati (Brahmana) man of knowledge, wisdom and virtue, give us knowledge and the sacred word. And may the pious and brilliant women of knowledge and vision give us instruction in the meaning of life and conduct. All these and all this be in truth of word and action. 
540 :In this world of Lord Savita’s creation, with the arms of the Ashwinis, that is, with the fiery brilliance of the sun and the soothing serenity of the moon, with the hands of Pusha, that is, with the nourishment and sustenance of the vital air, I anoint and consecrate you as the illustrious ruler of the land for the advancement of language and literature in the service of Saraswati (learning), for the promotion of science and technology, and invest you with the earthly regality of Brihaspati, the glorious lord of the mighty world. 
541 :Agni, with one akshara, syllable, Om and Gayatri verse conquered prana, vitality. So should I win that. (The ruler, bright as Agni, should win the heart of the people with good policies and advance them. So should the people support him). 
542 :The Ashwinis, sun and moon, with two-syllabic Ushnik verse, conquered the bipeds, humans. So should I win them. (The ruler and his officers should help and support the people. So should the people support them). 
543 :Vishnu, with three-syllabic Ushnik verse, conquered the three worlds. So should I win them. (The ruler, like Vishnu, should win and promote the regions with a name, a history and a location, and so should the regions support him). 
544 :Soma, with four-syllabic Brihati verse conquered the quadrupeds, animals. So should I win them (the ruler, eager for honour, should protect and promote the animals, wild as well as domestic. So should the people). 
545 :won and sustains the five directions (east, west, north, south and up and down), so should I win and support them. (The ruler should maintain and sustain nature in all directions and so should the people support the ruler and preserve nature). 
546 :Savita, the sun, with six-syllable Trishtup verse, generates and lights the six seasons, so should I light and enrich them. (The ruler should keep the seasons of nature clean and unpolluted, and so should the people.) The Maruts, winds, with seven-syllable Jagati verse sustain and support seven domestic animals. So should I protect and promote them. (The ruler should protect and promote the domestic animals, and the people should support the ruler and promote animal life.) Brihaspati, lord of the divine voice and knowledge, with eight-syllable yajushi anushtup verse conquered gayatri. So should I too master and serve that. (The ruler of the people should honour and preserve value-based policy of governance and administration and the people should support the ruler and maintain the policies of value and the values of right policies.) Mitra, universal friend of all, with nine-syllable yajushi brihati verse, won the three dimensional yajna of knowledge, action and worship. I too should accomplish the same. (The ruler should live an enlightened life of action and piety, and every citizen should follow the ruler and support him.) Varuna, the Supreme, worthy of choice, with the ten-syllable yajushi pankti verse, conquered the spirit and content of Virat, policy of sovereignty. I too should realize the same. 
547 :(The ruler should honour the sovereignty of his office, commit himself to policies of eternal values and be the guardian of his people. The people should honour and follow him in his foot-steps.) Indra, Lord of glory, with eleven-syllable asurya pankti verse, won the spirit and content of trishtup, and I should realize the same. 
548 :(The ruler should pursue the values and policies of magnanimity and excellence, and the people should emulate and support him.) Vishve-devas, noble spirits of the world, with twelve-syllable gayatri verse, realized the spirit and content of jagati, and I should realize the same. 
549 :(The ruler should commit himself to the highest policies of social life and universal good, and the people should follow and support him.) Vasus, brahmacharis of the 24 year order of study and training, with 13 syllable asuri-anushtup verse, have achieved the 13-point programme of life (i.e., ten pranic energies, jiva or soul, creative nature or mahat-tattva, and original/virtual nature). So should I achieve the same. 
550 :Rudras, brahmacharis of 44 year order of study and training, with 14 syllable samniushnik verse, have achieved the 14 point programme of life (i.e., ten organs of perception and volition, mind, intellect, memory and the sense of individual self). So should I achieve the same. 
551 :Adityas, brahmacharis of 48 years of study and training, with 15 syllable asuri-gayatri verse, have achieved the 15 point programme of life, (i.e., four Vedas, four sub-vedas, six auxiliary studies, and practical expertise). So should I achieve the same. 
552 :Aditi, Great-Council of Governance, with 16 syllable samni anushtup verse, has achieved the 16 point programme of life, (i.e., sixteen steps/constituents of the science of logic). So should I achieve the same. 
553 :Prajapati, ruler of the nation, with 17 syllable nichrid-arshi gayatri verse, has achieved the 17 point programme of life (i.e., four varnas, four ashramas, four steps of study, four steps of asset building, and final freedom. So should I achieve the same. 
554 :Note: In the four mantras above, from 31 to 34, a comprehensive programme of living has been given for the ruler and the people, of any locality, region, country or, in fact, of the world. It ranges from a one-point programme to 17 point programme. The whole programme is summarized below the seven classes of animals: cow, horse, buffalo, camel, goat, sheep, and pony. 
555 :The points are to be worked out by the enlightened ruler and the enlightened people in mutual cooperation in the local context with reference to the past, present and the future. 
556 :Man of felicity beyond reproach, this is your share of Raj Dharma, governance, administration and service of the republic, your power-and-responsibility, assets- and-liabilities integrated. Serve it with words and acts of truth. Serve it with words and acts of Dharma, by the noble people of the very eyes and leadership of light and fire sitting in front of you in the council. 
557 :Serve it with words and acts of charity, by the people of the speed and guidance of the wind itself on your right side. 
558 :Serve it with words and acts of courage, by the noble people of the eyes and leadership of the world heroes on your back. 
559 :Serve it with words and acts of saints and sages of knowledge and wisdom, by the noble people of the eyes and leadership of the best, the friendliest, the wisest and the most dynamic yajnic souls of the nation on your left side. 
560 :Serve it with words and acts of peace and love under the protective bliss of the noble people of the light and leadership of the soothing serenity of the moon itself, servants of knowledge, humility, Dharma and Ishwara. 
561 :Ye dev a ’ agninetrah purahsadastebhyah svaha ye deva yamanetra daksinasadastebhyah svaha ye deva visvadevanetrah pascatsadastebhyah svaha ye deva mitravarunanetra vd marunnetra vottarasadastebhyah svaha ye devah somanetra ’ uparisado duvasvantastebhyah svaha. 
562 :Honour and salutations in truth of word and sincerity of heart to those men of knowledge and nobility in the eastern quarters of the republic who are dedicated to light and electricity. 
563 :Honour and salutations in truth of word and sincerity of action to those noble men of justice in the southern quarters of the republic who are dedicated to the practice and discipline of the social and personal ethics of yoga. 
564 :Honour and salutations in truth of word and reason to those noble men of knowledge in the western quarters of the republic whose science and philosophy shines in the scholars of the nation. 
565 :Honour and salutations in truth of word and gratitude to those noble men of peace and bliss in the northern quarters of the republic who deal with everyone equally and justly as the wind touches all equally and who guide the nation to Dharma and strength as the circuit of prana and apana energy strengthens and Honour and salutations in truth of word and reverence to those noble men of knowledge and Dharma in the upper quarters of the republic who bless the nation with the gift of soma and good health and longevity. 
566 :Agni, enlightened mler, face and defeat the enemy, remove the proud, overcome poverty and selfishness, and, hero of invincible prowess, fill this land with honour and brilliance. 
567 :Ruler of the republic, in this sacred land of Lord Savita’s creation, in truth of word and action, I accept, consecrate and celebrate you, protected by the arms of the Ashwinis, the fiery brilliance of the sun and the soothing serenity of the moon, blest by the generous hands of Pusha, the powers of health and nourishment, and supported by the prowess of your close associates, the I accept and consecrate you for the destruction of evil. The evil is destroyed. We must punish the wicked, destroy him. Yes, he is destroyed. 
568 :Ruler of the land, may Savita, creator and promoter of honour and prosperity, inspire you. You are like the fire of the householders’ yajna, sap and life of the herbs and trees, truth of the heart of the good, friend and favourite of the servants and protectors of Dharma. For the advancement of learning, you are like Brihaspati, lord of knowledge. For the greatness and glory of the land, you are like Indra, lord of glory. For the animals, you are like Rudra, lord protector of the animals. 
569 :Noble people of the land/world, this man (first among us all), son of a noble father, son of a noble mother, graceful as the moon and inspiring as soma, accepted and anointed as he is as the ruler, yours, ours, and others’, Brahmanas, all, cooperate and render him free from conflict and opposition for the sake of a mighty republic, supreme sovereignty, the highest government of the people, the glory of the order of the world. 
570 :Noble men of wisdom and virtue obtain waters/ energies, sweet, invigorating, illuminating and enlightening by which they strengthen, cleanse and consecrate their prana, udana, and electric vitalities and ward off all conflicts and negativities of life. 
571 :Mighty lord, shower of generosity, bringer of prosperity wave on wave, maker of the nation and builder of the republic, give me a sovereign republic of human values and just policies. 
572 :Illustrious lord of generosity, ocean of knowledge of polity, harbinger of prosperity and comfort to the people, bless him (bless all of them) with the unity of the nation and dignity of the republic with truth of word Generous lord of a mighty force, maker of the republic, give me a world republic of universal values and universal peace. 
573 :Generous lord of universal power of love and Dharma, maker of the world, give us all a world state of universal love and universal Dharma. 
574 :Artheta stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha ’- rtheta stha rastrada rastramamusmai dattau- jasvati stha rastrada rastram me datta svahau- jasvati stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta-’ pah parivahini stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha’pah parivahini stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta’park patirasi rastrada rastram me dehi svaha’pam patirasi rastrada rastramamusmai dehyaparh garbho ’si rastrada rastram me dehi svaha ’pam garbho ’si rastrada rastramamusmai dehi. 
575 :Men of the country striving for wealth, builders of the nation, keep on striving, build a republic of truth in word and action for me. Men of wealth, go on striving for prosperity, contributing to the republic, and give Brilliant women of the republic, maintain your vigour and brilliance, contributing to the republic, and build for me a nation of love and justice. Keep up your genius and vigour contributing to the republic, and give him and all a great nation. 
576 :Married women of the nation, dear as water and the breath of life to your partners, stay good and faithful in your love to your home, contributing to the families of the nation and give me a state of true discipline and virtue. Keep the channels of the nation flowing, contributing to the growth of the nation’s life, and give him and all a dynamic state of brilliant leaders. 
577 :Lord of the waters of the state, builder of a progressive state, give me a dynamic state of governance in truth of word and action. Lord of the national movements, keep the flow on for the nation and give him and all a state of clean governance and administration. 
578 :Protector of the waters, generous giver of the republic, give me an affluent state of prosperity with values of truth and honesty. Protector of national progress, contributing to management and development, give him and all a republic, a state and a nation marching ahead and onward. 
579 :Suryatvacasa stha rastrada rastram me datta svahd suryatvacasa stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta suryavarcasa stha rastrada rastram me datta svahd suryavarcasa stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta manda stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha manda stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta vrajaksita stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha vrajaksita stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta vasa stha rastrada rastram me datta svahd vasa stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta savistha stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha savistha stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta sakvarl stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha sakvarl stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta janabhrta stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha janabhrta stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta visvabhrta stha rastrada rastram me datta svaha visvabhrta stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta dpah svaraja stha rastrada rastramamusmai datta. Madhu- mafirmadhumatibhih prcyantam mahi ksatram ksatriyaya vanvana anadhrstah sidata sahaujaso mahi ksatram ksatriyaya dadhatih. 
580 :Members of the Council, bright as the sun in your bearing, makers of the nation, give me a great republic with the values of truth and justice. Stay firm in your brilliance of bearing contributing to the nation, and give the common man a republic of truth and justice. 
581 :Leaders of the land, men of learning, illustrious in character as the sun, makers of the nation, be firm in your brilliance of learning, and give me a state of learning and enlightenment in truth of word and values. Stay firm in your brilliance, contributing to the nation, and give to the citizen a nation of learning and wisdom. 
582 :Men of vision and arts, creating joy in words of vision and light, be happy makers of the nation and give me a nation of happy people. Stay firm and strong in joy contributing to the nation, and create for the common man a nation of happiness and joy in truth of value and virtue. 
583 :Farmers, living in your farms with the wealth of animals, makers of the nation in truth of word and simplicity of character, give me a nation rich in food and milk. Farmers and husbandmen, stay firm, contributing to the nation, and give to the common man a nation of happy and satisfied people. 
584 :Be men of will and ambition, makers of the nation, and give me a nation of courage and action in truth of word and deed. Stay firm in your will, contributing to the nation, and inspire the people to be a nation with passion for development and progress. 
585 :Be men of strength and prowess, makers of the nation, and give me a nation of power and prestige in truth of word and sincerity of character. Stay firm in your determination, contributing to the nation, and give to the citizens a nation of strength and dignity. 
586 :Women of the land, makers of the nation, be strong and powerful, and give me a nation of disciplined and virtuous young heroes of truth and honesty of word and action. Stay firm in your strength and dignity, contributing to the nation, and build up a nation of strong and heroic people for the citizens. 
587 :Be sustainers of the people, makers of the nation in words of truth and action in discipline, and give me a nation of happy and disciplined people. Stay firm in your generosity, supporting the people, contributing to the nation, and give the citizens a state of happy and disciplined people. 
588 :Be sustainers of the world, makers of a world- state in truth of word and action, and give me a universal nation of common human values. Stay firm, supporting the people of the world, contributing to the world state, and give to humanity one order of governance and organization of freedom for every citizen of the world. 
589 :People of knowledge, Dharma and universal values, brilliant in your own right of character and wisdom, makers of a world nation in truth of word and action, stay brilliant and firm and give to every citizen of the world a world order of governance and universal justice. 
590 :Women of the world, sweet as honey and deeply loving, meet with others equally sweet and loving, keen and anxious for a grand world order and conscientiously working for a supreme sovereign world state, stay fearless and, holding and sustaining that great world order for the sovereign rulers, sit and participate with men of equal power and brilliance. 
591 :Ruler of the land, you are the brilliance of Soma, light of the nation’s glory. May my light of dignity be like yours. For the knowledge and power of fire and electricity for the nation, let there be specific and factual language and study of science. For Soma, life-sciences, knowledge of biology and medicine; for the sun, astronomy and cosmology; for Saraswati (Veda and education), grammar and Vedanga, i.e., auxiliary studies on the subject; for Pusha (pranic vitality and material growth), yoga and economics; for Brihaspati (lord of the universe), spiritual knowledge ; for Indra (lord of the senses, jivatma, the soul), intelligence and inner light; for language and communication, effective teaching and discussion; for poetry and composition, poetics; for the subtle elements of nature, science of atoms; for honour and prosperity, industry and dedication; for Aryama (leader of justice), politics of value and jurisprudence. 
592 :Ruler of the land/President of the council, free from pollution of mind and character, seasoned and tempered in the discipline of austerity, dedicated as a brother to the sacred voice of knowledge, you are an instrument of Soma, nature’s power of health and growth. 
593 :Both of you (ruler and people, teachers and students, boys as well as girls), endowed with universal virtues of mind and character, stay pure and unsullied. In this holy world of Lord Savita’s creation, I sanctify you all with a ceaseless flow of the purest rays of the sun and the light of higher knowledge. Act in truth of word and deed and create noble heroes for the nation. 
594 :The ruler, best choice of the people, should send the children of the mothers/nation to residential schools of the most affectionate and motherly teachers — mothers/nation, free and fearless, intelligent and educated, cool as water, smart at work, shining in prosperity, brilliant in achievement, living happy and together in beautiful homes. 
595 :Ruler of the nation, you are the strength and shield of the people, first cover of the republic, creator of its honour and dignity, and centre-pin of its governance. You are like the thunderbolt of lightning for the clouds of the enemy. You are friends with the friends and best with the good. By you and with you the nation would eliminate the simulators, the evaders and the hypocrites. You are a destroyer of the forts of evil and a plague upon the enemy. 
596 :Defend him in all directions, from all directions, front, back and cross-wise. 
597 :All ye mortals, men and women, if the fire, sustainer of the home, or the man of knowledge and wisdom brilliant as agni (light) is well-known, and beneficent to you, if the man who has heard and attained the knowledge of all the Shastras is well-known and beneficent, if Indra, the man of power commanding the forces is well-known and committed to you, if friends and noble people dedicated to vows of goodness and virtue are close to you and kind, if Pusha, versatile man of medicine, giver of health and longevity is well-known and kind, if the heavens and electric energy and the earth are well-known and generous, if the mother and mother nature, generous givers of abundant love and joy, are well known, loved with reverence, and generous to you — if you know, love and respect all these and they are kind and generous to you, then happiness is assured for you. 
598 :Cross the hurdles on the way, eliminate the deadly biters, go forward (east) and rise to the heights. And while you drive on the chariot of life, may the light of Gayatri lead you on; the music of the Samans inspire you ; the triple strength of body, mind and speech empower you; the three fold voice of the Veda (knowledge, action and prayer) exhort you; and may the beauty of the spring season, the vision of the universe and the wealth of existence bless you on the way. 
599 :Go forward on the right (south) and rise to the heights. And while you are on the way, the light of science contained in the Trishtup verses would reveal to you; the fifteenfold strength of great Samans (five pranas, five senses, and five elements) would empower you; the heat of the summer season would hasten your speed, and the splendour of governance and the wealth of existence would bless you. 
600 :Go forward west, and rise high, and the various science of wealth contained in the Jagati verses would reveal to you; the seventeen-fold power of the Samans (five organs of volition, five objects of volition, five subtle elements and the science of cause and effect of materials) would enrich you; and the showers of the rainy season and the economic wealth of the world would bless you. 
601 :Go forward north and rise high, and the art of communication of knowledge contained in Anushtup verses would reveal to you; the twenty-one-fold various brilliance of the Samans (sixteen potentials, faculties of the soul, four-fold effort for fulfilment in life and the freedom of action) would enlighten you; and the length of winter years and wealth of the fruits of service would bless you. 
602 :Move up and rise high, and the knowledge contained in the Pankti verses, Shakvara and the Raivata parts of the Samans, the knowledge of the three divisions of time (past, present and future), the science of nine numbers (1-9), and of the thirty-three powers of nature (8 Vasus, 11 Rudras, 12 Adityas, Indra, i.e., electric energy, and yajna, i.e., cosmic chemistry) would reveal to you; the lustre of knowledge and discipline and the wealth of life would bless you. The heads of the sinner, the thief and the preventer would be down. 
603 :You are the light of majesty and magnificence. May your light be mine too. You are the lustre of life, the constancy of courage, and the immortality of existence. Save me from mortality. 
604 :You are Mitra, friend of all. You are Varuna, the best of all and subduer of the enemies. Both of you are bright and powerful like gold, like the sun, like Indra. And just as the sun and the moon with their light light up the night and the dawn, so you too, with your illuminating actions, rise and enlighten the world around you. Ascend your chariot of knowledge, watch the world of permanence and impermanence, and spread the light. 17. (Kshatrapati Devata, Varuna Rshi) I anoint and consecrate you as the ruler with the light and grace of the moon, the brilliance of fire, the glory of the sun, and the swiftness of sense and mind like the velocity of electricity. Ascend the throne of the republic to do more than justice to the seat of governance. Develop the missiles of defence and protect and promote knowledge, Dharma and prosperity of the nation. 
605 :This brilliant man of knowledge and virtuous character, son of a noble father and of a noble mother is our ruler, yours, ours and of all others, all Brahmanas, i.e., the learned community of the land. 
606 :members of the army, all support him for the establishment of a grand world order of governance, for a great enlightened and meritorious community, for a great democracy of the people and for the dignity and honour of a mighty state. Let us render him universally acceptable so that he has to face no rival, no adversary, no enemy. 
607 :From the top of the cloud, over the top of clouds, flying boats, fuelled and driven, roam around in the sky like boats on the sea. Piloted from down below on earth, soaring up like clouds into the sky, they pursue the clouds as Indra pursued Vritra. Master-maker of the nation, in the wide spaces of Lord Vishnu, you are capable of creating various kinds of motion. You are capable of creating special and definite steers of motion as the wind’s. You are the cause and source of motion and speed by the power of energy. 
608 :Prajcipate na tvadetanyanyo visvd rupani pari ta babhuva. Yatkamaste juhumastanno astvayamamusya pita ’savasya pita vayam syarna patayo rayinam svaha. Rudra yatte krivi pararh nama tasmin hutamasyamestamasi svaha. 
609 :Prajapati, Lord Supreme, father and protector of created beings, there is none other than you over, above and beyond, to be, to know, and to reveal all the forms of existence in the world. 
610 :Whatever the aim, object or desire for which we worship you, may that be fulfilled for us. 
611 :Father and guardian as you are of the seen and the unseen world, so may we be masters and guardians of the riches of life in truth of word and action. 
612 :Rudra, Lord of justice and punishment, destroyer as you are of evil, that is the supreme name by which we worship you and celebrate you in the home in truth of word with honest action. 
613 :Ruler of the land, you are like the thunderbolt of Indra (lightning) in power, inviolable, clean and spotless. I appoint you by the advice of the Governor of the council and the commander of the army for the exercise of your official powers freely and constructively without pain or fear or tyranny. Act with the inspiration, advice and support of the positive yajnic people of dynamic spirit and win your victories/goals. We are with you with all our will and power. 
614 :Ma ta’ indra te vayam turasadayuktaso abrahmata vidasama. Tistha rathamadhi yam vajrahasta rasmln deva yamase svasvan. 
615 :Indra, Ruler of the land, hero of the thunderbolt in hand, swift as you are in action and victory over the enemy, may we, your officers and people, never, disaffected, fall off from you. May you too never suffer disaffection from Ishwara and never fall off from your faith. 
616 :Hero of the people, thunderbolt in hand, ascend and ride the chariot, take the reins in hand by which you drive the steeds and, swift in action, achieve your goals. 
617 :Ruler and chiefs of the nation, provide and promote for agni, the enlightened householder, a true policy of value and virtue; for soma, herbs and trees, forestry and knowledge of Botany; for the strength, energy and lustre of the most dynamic people (maruts), yoga and peace-giving words; for the honour of Indra, ruler, right conduct and good reading; for the working efficiency of the soul (Indra), good instruction and practice. Mother earth, hurt me not. Nor shall I hurt you. Mother mine, ruin me not with wrong instruction. Nor must I hurt you (with ingratitude). 
618 :Ishvara, the Supreme Soul of the Universe, is the maker of forms from elements, present in all forms of purity, universal abode of all, present in the sky, creator of the universal yajna, present in and on the earth, holy as a sacred visitor, present in the homes, humans, the best of things, eternal nature and its law, and in all space, creator of the waters, stars and planets, giver of the light of eternal knowledge of the Veda, creator of the clouds, mountains and forests, the very Truth and Law Itself, and the greatest and highest of existence. 
619 :You are so vast, so far, so great, wherever my eye goes. You are life Itself. Give me life and longevity. You join me with you in samadhi. You are the light and lustre of existence. Give me that lustre. You are Energy Itself. Give me energy. 
620 :Ruler and people of the land, you are the arms of the Lord of Power, creator of virility. I take you both close to Him. 
621 :Woman of power: You are the beauty and grace of life, giver of peace and joy, and mother-maker of the nation. Come, take up your office of dignity to create joy and comfort for the people around and do justice to the judgement seat of the nation. 
622 :The man committed to national vows of Dharma, dedicated to noble actions, first and best of choice for justice, should occupy the offices of power and administration for the governance of the republic. 
623 :Subduer of the evil and the wicked, you are the dominant ruler. May all the five directions be favourable to you. Man of spiritual vision and knowledge, you are a scholar of the Vedas and creator of all comfort and joy, light and honour with noble actions of truth. Man of first and best choice, possessed of excellence, truth is your real power and lustre. Man of dignity and majesty, your greatness lies in the strength and support of the people. Man of justice, destroyer of sin and crime, harbinger of various kinds of happiness, doer of good over and over again, you are the thunderbolt of lightning action. With that instant power, protect me, save me, perfect me. 
624 :Just as agni (fire), great and expansive, observer of Dharma, served in yajna, receives the libations and, sitting in the midst of its associate created materials and living beings, atomizes the materials and, with the rays of the sun radiates them into space, so should the ruler, brilliant, great and expansive like fire, observe his/her Raj Dharma, and in truth with justice, serve the nation. So should also the noble and honest members of the Council, in truth of word and action, observe their Dharma and try to serve the nation. 
625 :Inspired by Lord Savita, the creator of life, for creativity, enlightened by the sacred word of the Veda by the grace of Saraswati, the Lord’s spirit of omniscience, projecting various forms of development by the grace of Twashta, the Lord’s power of art, breathing the generosity of the earth (Pusha) to nourish the animals and other living creatures, realizing the possibilities of growth through electric energy by the grace of Indra, the Lord’s power and force of nature, with the magnanimity of Brihaspati, the Lord’s immanence in the universe and His eternal wisdom revealed in the Veda, with a sense of honour and obligation by the grace of Varuna, the Lord’s majesty and glory, with the heat of fire by the grace of Agni, the Lord’s light and refulgence, with the soothing vitality and beneficence of mind like the vitality of Soma and beauty of the moon, and with broadness of mind inspired by the Lords omnipresence in the universe, the tenth attribute of the Lord as Vishnu, and finally, supported by the will and words of our people — inspired, shaped and committed thus I (the ruler) move on in the business of governance. 
626 :Ruler/officer/citizen, develop and be mature by the instructions of the teacher and the preceptor. Be mature for the attainment of knowledge and wisdom, and for decent communication. Develop yourself and prepare for the honour and defence of the nation. Seasoned and sanctified as the pure wind through noble conduct and performance, be worthy of respect and admiration. Rise in knowledge, dignity and grace, be lovable as soma and the moon, and you would be a chosen companion of Indra, the ruler, and the Supreme Lord of life. 
627 :Ruler/Man of knowledge and honour, seasoned and sanctified you are in the discipline of education by teachers and preceptors. We accept you for the sake of knowledge and effective speech, in the service of the republic, for the honour and defence of the nation. 
628 :Senior men of knowledge sitting around the fire on seats of grass chant words of homage in praise of the divine. Treat them to food and liberal hospitality with reverence. 
629 :The farmers harvest barley in a certain order, sift the grain from the chaff and keep it safe. Protect the farmers, and, like them, sift the grain of truth from the chaff of untruth and protect the truth. 
630 :President of the council and commander of the forces, bright and beneficent as the sun and the moon, dedicated to truth, protectors of the republic, and promoters of good social developments, both of you safeguard and advance the man of power and prosperity (such as the producer or the ruler or the administrator) who is whole heartedly and unfailingly dedicated to generous acts of public good (like the cloud showering rain for humanity). 
631 :Ruler of the land/President of the council, you have enjoyed the delightful exhilaration of life by virtue of noble intelligence and wonderful exploits worthy of celebration in song. May your wife, with the vision and wisdom of Saraswati, spirit of poetry, serve and celebrate you in the home. 
632 :President of the council, and Commander of the forces, both of you, with the order and approval of the ruler, and with actions worthy of song in poetry, defend the nation and the land as parents guard and promote their children. 
633 :The man desirous of spiritual vision and earthly brilliance in search of the essence of spirit and matter, should concentrate his senses, mind and memory, direct it all on the universal energy immanent in nature, collect the light of Agni, Supreme Spirit and universal power, and bring that knowledge of experience down to the earth. 
634 :We men of yoga, in this world of Lord Savita’s creation, with all our mind and energy collected, concentrated and directed on the Spirit/on the object of our search, bring the light of heaven to the earth to turn it into a very paradise. 
635 :The yogis, noble people, trying to reach the regions of light and heavenly bliss with their mind and sense, refine their faculties as instruments of divination into the light and mystery of infinity. Savita, Lord of light and generator of life, inspires their mind and soul and helps them to join with the object of their love and ambition. 
636 :Great is the glory and high the praise of Savita, generous creator of light and life, the one mighty, infinite, all seeing, all-knowing lord of the universe. He alone receives all our prayers and sacrifices. Thereon do yogis, men of wisdom and vision, concentrate their mind and intelligence — only there and nowhere else. 
637 :Yuje vain brahma purvyam namobhir visloka ’etu pathyeva sureh. Srnvantu visve ’amrtasya putra ’ a ye dhamani divydni tasthuh. 
638 :I join, and join you both, with the eternal lord of the universe with hymns of praise and prayer as did the yogis of old. May our song of prayer reach its divine destination by the sure path of the great and the wise seers. Listen all ye children of Immortality who inhabit the holy worlds of the Lord’s creation and join to reach the goal. 
639 :The great Lord Savita with His own power and majesty has created all the regions of the earth and heaven. He is the lord of light omnipresent in this world whose great path of Dharma and yoga all the noble people and others have followed with all their power and potential. 
640 :Savita, lord of light and glory, light our yajna and promote our action for the attainment of happiness and prosperity. Bless and promote the yajnapati to achieve honour and wealth. Lord sustainer of the earth, brilliant and holy, giver and purifier of life and knowledge, purify our science and consecrate our pursuit. Lord giver and purifier of speech, purify and elevate our speech with sweetness and grace. 
641 :Savita, lord of life and inspiration, light, promote and expand this yajna of ours which protects our noble people and the virtues of our character, favours our friends, wins our yajnic sessions of truth and gives us wealth and happiness. Let it prosper with the chants of Rgvedic hymns and advance into the wealth of Dharma and knowledge with the truth of word and honesty of action. Let it rise with the gayatri verses revealing the paths of progress and prosperity to be covered and won through the scientific gifts of rathantara, modes of speed and progress. 
642 :Man of knowledge and vision, I accept and welcome you as a man initiated by fire in this world of Savita’s creation alongwith the force and attraction of the energy of prana and the attraction and retention of the life-giving air. 
643 :Take up the study of agni (heat and electricity) immanent in the earth and revealed in the gayatri verses, and discover and develop for us its energy value like that of prana, the breath of life. Discover the energy- potential of the waters revealed in the trishtubh verses, and develop it like the blazing ambers of fire. 
644 :Man of scholarship and imagination, you are a tool of discovery and development of yajnic value for humanity. Living together with you, let us be able to discover the secrets and then develop the power of agni (fire and electricity) with the help of the jagati verses of the Veda — agni which is like the very breath of life. 
645 :Savita, the creative man of science, having taken up and holding a golden spade, should dig out and collect the light and power of agni (electricity) with the help of the anushtubh verses of the Veda and bear it on the earth like the life-breath of humanity. 
646 :Warlike man of heroic knowledge, come flying on the wings at top speed, best and well-controlled. You are a child of the region of the sun, your navel, centre hold, is in the middle regions of the sky, and your home and values are on the ground. 
647 :Man of science and man of technology, both of you creators of a shower of wealth, yoke this horsepower of fire/electricity to this carriage bearing and taking us to our destination. 
648 :Friends, in project on project, and battle after battle, we call upon Indra, our powerful ruler, to protect us and defend the country. 
649 :Overpowering the enemies, crushing the oppositions, go forward and, creating peace and wellbeing, come on top of the forces of the lord of justice (Rudra). 
650 :Creating fearlessness all round, moving on the paths of peace and welfare, with strengthening and supporting comrades, rise to the vast skies. 
651 :Man of knowledge and vision, from the surface of the earth/from the midst of the sky, isolate and collect heat/magnetic/electric energy, a source of comfort like the light of the sun. From the surface of the earth/from admidst the sky, we collect in abundance heat/electric/ magnetic energy, a source of comfort like the breath of air. From the depths of the earth/heights of the sky, we shall collect heat/magnetic/electric energy in abundance, a source of comfort and prosperity like the breath of life. 
652 :The original agni (fire) is present in every thing that is born in the universe. It is there before the dawn, and with the dawn it proclaims the day. It is there before the sun, and with the sun it pervades the rays of light across the earth, the skies and the heavens. 
653 :of existence, so should the learned man spread the light of knowledge everywhere). 
654 :The war-horse, having come on the course, shakes the enemy in battle. The house-holder, in his extensive home, loves to collect, light and watch the fire. 
655 :(So should the ruler of the land shake the enemies, light the fire of yajna and enlighten the people with education). 
656 :Hero of light, speed and power, having shaken the enemies and having settled the earth in peace, you take up agni (power and gold) with interest and excitement, and ask us to go over the land so that we may dig out and develop the same. 
657 :Enlightened ruler of the land, your past is as bright as the sun, your present seat is firm as the earth, your soul is magnanimous as the vast sky, your origin is as deep as the ocean. Look round with your eye and be firm and strong to face the challenges. 
658 :Man of power and action, giver of wealth, rise up from this place of ours for the sake of great good fortune so that, digging out the wealth of the earth hidden in her womb (that is agni, gold and energy), we may be prosperous and feel secure in our proper mind. 
659 :Man of science and technology, producer of wealth, just as a powerful impetuous steed gallops fast and high on its course, so you rise and advance to win a beautiful, well-deserved state of joy, the best, a very paradise on earth. And then we too, desiring and working for a life of joy, shall dig out and collect from earth and air a wonderful golden wealth of energy and create a very heaven for all. 
660 :I take you up, O fire/wind, to study and celebrate with all my mind, besprinkled with the fragrance of ghee, co-existent with all things and all regions of the world, extensive, moving in all directions in waves, grown powerful with food, and so beautiful to perceive. 
661 :I perceive agni (fire and vital air) directly in and from all directions. It is the beauty and wealth of humanity, lovely in form and colour, and, vibrating by and through the body, it is soothing and auspicious to feel and endure. Just as I take it up for study and celebration with an honest mind full of love and reverence, so you too all take it up and enjoy. 
662 :Agni, creator, producer, preserver and giver of food and energy, omniscient eye of the universe, holds and wields the wealth of the world for the generous and the deserving people. Through the fire, He receives and universally disperses the materials offered in yajna by the house-holders. 
663 :Agni/Commander of the forces, brilliant, courageous, enduring, awesome, pious and knowledgeable, defender of the weak and destroyer of the wicked, day in and day out we honour you, praise you, thank you in gratitude. 
664 :Agni/Ruler/Yajamana, guardian and protector of the people, brilliant as daylight, instant in action against evil and darkness, from the waters and air, herbs, forests and sunbeams, thunder, cloud and granite, you take the best and rise pure and purer, strong and stronger among the people every day every way. 
665 :Devasya tva savituh prasave ’svinorbahubhyam pusno hastabhyam. Prthivyah sadhasthadagnim purisyamahgirasvat khandmi. Jyotismantam tvagne supratikamajasrena bhanunb didyatam. Sivam prajabhyo ’hints ant am prthivyah sadhasthadagnim p u ri sy amah giras vat khandmah. 
666 :In this yajnic world of Lord Savita’s creation, (in the field of science and technology), with the attraction- sustenance power of the earth and the sun, and the positive-negative circuit of universal energy, from the womb of the earth and the sky, I discover and develop the heat and light of agni, immanent and beneficent power of nature present like air everywhere. 
667 :and develop the power of agni, electricity from the midst of the sky, since it is present universally like the breath of air — agni which is a source of light, bright and beautiful, blazing by the splendour of the eternal sun, injuring none, and a means of comfort and happiness for all the people. 
668 :Agni, universal electric energy, you are the carrier of the waters and the mother of fire. Expanding the oceans (on earth and in the sky), yourself expanding on all sides, go on expanding with the expansive space of the heavens in the great womb of eternity. 
669 :Man and wife, both of you live together in a comfortable home of peace and plenty, safety and security, in a state of abundance and uninterrupted happiness. Live together a long age with yajna which, well-maintained, is the best guardian-source of conjugal bliss. 
670 :Man and wife, come together with heart and soul in unison, fully caring for each other and all, attaining a state of conjugal bliss, and live in peace and joy a long age with yajna fire, eternal light immanent in all, giving life and energy to all — and extended through the yajna of technology to be a source of new power and comfort. 
671 :Agni, fire/electric energy, present in everything, you are the sustainer of the world. The first man of highest knowledge of reality, ‘Atharva’, explores you on top of the world, collects you and brings you down from the sky. 
672 :Then ‘Dadhyang’, man of science and technology, and son-like disciple of the man of vision and science, ‘Atharva’, further lights and develops you, Tndra’, i.e., electric energy, breaker of the clouds and shatterer of the hidden sources. 
673 :Agni, energy existing in water and air, showerlike source of power, winner of wealth in project after project, destroyer of evil and wickedness, I develop you in a positive and constructive manner. 
674 :Hota, expert of the science of yajna, take your seat of bliss on the vedi, light and complete the yajna in the home of the noble yajamana. Agni, presiding power of yajna, developed and protected by the noble sages, feed the devas, powers of nature, with yajna materials and bless the yajamana with the great gift of health and longevity. 
675 :The young disciple, participant in the yajna of education, sits close to his teacher in the house of learning. Eager to learn and shine brilliant in virtue and Dharma, smart and strong in performance, he is dedicated fearlessly to the vows and values of his own conscious choice. Blest is he with a thousand virtues of generosity, with a tongue of purity like fire itself. 
676 :Agni, venerable teacher, participating in the yajna of education, great indeed you are and most eminent of noble scholars. Shine and burn with the light of knowledge and purity. Take your preceptorial seat, remove the dark and create a full human being, handsome and brilliant as the day. 
677 :Man of science and medicine, create excellent waters of spirituous efficacy and with their use in horticulture produce medicinal herbs and fruits for treatment of the people against consumptive diseases. 
678 :Lady of the home, generous and broadminded, may the fragrant air of yajna sailing in the mother-sky support and inspire your liberal heart beaming with joy. 
679 :Lord of home, noble and generous, moving in the company of the blessed and the brilliant people with spirit and enthusiasm, may all my effort and action be for your good. 
680 :Agni/Grihastha, well-arisen with light and lustre, abide in peace and security in your happy home. Shining with beauty and prosperity, live decently, enjoy all forms and modes of dress and ornaments, without vanity. 
681 :Agni, worthy house-holder of yajnic work and conduct of love and non-violence, arise, and, with noble and virtuous intelligence, advance and protect us. Brilliant as fire and the sun, go forward with great splendour and fame, doing laudable work for all to see. 
682 :Learned teacher, of high quality of mind and intelligence, brilliant as the sun, stay firm for our protection and progress. Eminent scholar of science and technology as you are, you procure for us means of power and defence. We call upon you and honour you with the scholars of distinction and penetrative vision sharp as the beams of sunlight. 
683 :Learned teacher, man of knowledge, just as the morning sun, rising between the heaven and earth, beautiful, of various wonders, as its warmth is absorbed in the herbs, dispels the shades of darkness from the heaven and earth and moves on rising in its glory, so should the child grow up gaining the light of knowledge to shine in the life of its parents in the home. 
684 :Child, keen for knowledge, be firm in the matter of education. Strong of body, sharp and smart in action, fast in learning and doing, gain practical knowledge of life’s affairs. Bright as fire and light, create a place of dignity for yourself. Enjoy great prosperity and support the people around. 
685 :Sonny, dear as my breath of life, be good to the people, to all human creations. Damage not the earth and the environment, pollute not the sky, do not desecrate the heavens. Do not destroy the trees and the forests. 
686 :Dear son, educated and enlightened, vibrating, fast and fiery with electric energy, rushing, roaring, giving, shooting to the goal, fall not before the full years of your life are attained. 
687 :Potent, creative, procreative, bearing and using the versatile energy of electricity, bring the showers of rain, child of the sea, sky and solar power, down to earth for the good of all. 
688 :simple, straight, constant and eternal. We observe it in life and conduct. We know the truth of existence, real and dynamic. We follow it in thought, word and deed. We bear and use ‘agni’, the energy of nature, life’s mode of preservation and promotion, and scientific means of protection and prosperity. It blesses herbs, trees and other vegetation, and these give us health and energy. 
689 :Listen you all, this agni is come, so good and blissful. Welcome it in response and rejoice. 
690 :Be seated, man of science and medicine. Drive off all that is enervating and infectious. Throw off all that is stupid and ill-disposed. 
691 :Come would be mothers (in response to the generosity of nature), take the soothing beauty of the herbal flowers and the nectar-sweets of fruit so that the timely arrival of the coming guest to the maternal womb may be auspicious. 
692 :Dear husband, blest with various strength and power, bright and pure as agni (light), great, prosperous and generous, dedicated to yajna and social life, stop and remove the jealous, hostile and wicked enemies of our married life, and I would live happy in your beautiful home of love and peace, observing your noble values of life. 
693 :Women, pure, cool and generous like holy waters, creators of domestic peace and conjugal joy, stay firm and constant and hold on with strength and energy to face the great and memorable battles of life with us. 
694 :Women, the most blissful pleasure and happiness of life that is yours and ours, create and share the same here in the home with us with the love and passion for motherhood. 
695 :Women, cool, pure and generous like holy waters, be active and happy and create conjugal peace and joy for a happy home for us and yourselves. And we too shall be wholly and exclusively with you with all our heart and soul. 
696 :Just as Mitra, the sun, joining the earth and the sky, illumines the two with its light, similarly I join you, Agni (yajna fire), brilliant and beautiful, and light you for the health and well-being of the people. 
697 :Just as you, husband and dear friend, having joined the earth and home with the light of your knowledge and sense of justice, give me love and joy for the health and happiness of the family and the people, so do I join and help you, man of noble birth and education, in the life of the home and the people. 
698 :Rudras (creative energies of the universe) create the earth and light it with the sun. The sun is the concentration of their energy and shines among the luminous objects continuously. 
699 :Similarly, men and women of knowledge and justice create the light and joy of life among the people and shine like the sun. 
700 :Young man, just as an artist refines and softens his plastic material with his hands and creates a beautiful form, so a girl, soft and gentle, dexterous of hand and efficient in yajna ritual, shaped and refined by serious teachers of Vasu and Rudra (of twenty-four and thirty- six years) standing is worthy of your love. Win her love and take her to wife. 
701 :Aditi, infinite creative power, mother of the universe, the young woman inspired with love, of beautiful hair, handsome of body, wearing beautiful ornaments, virtuous in action and expert in food preparation carries in her hands a tray of delicious foods and waits on you. 
702 :Young householder, you are the head of yajna. With her power, skill and intelligence, and, with her own hands, may Aditimake a tray of yajna materials for you. 
703 :Just as a mother holds her baby in her lap, so may your wife hold agni, a bright and vibrating foetus, in her womb in grihastha yajna. 
704 :Virgin girl, firm and strong you are like the breath of vitality, blissful and generous as earth. May the teachers of the Vasu order of 24 years prepare you with the inspiring gayatri verses to be my wife and give you unto me. 
705 :Bachelor youth, unshakeable as the vital air and tolerant as the earth, may the teachers of the Vasu order of 24 years prepare you with the inspiring gayatri verses to be my husband and give you unto me. Bless me with children, wealth of life, good health, economic prosperity, and honour and lustre. And the children would be for the yajamana, the teacher, for study. 
706 :Young woman, you are firm like the sky, full of love like the space between earth and heaven. May the teachers of the Rudra order of 36 years prepare you with the trishtup verses to be my wife and give you unto me. 
707 :Young man, you are firm like the sky, full of love like the space between earth and heaven. May the teachers of the Rudra order of 36 years prepare you with the trishtup verses to be my husband and give you unto me. Get me children, wealth of life, good health, economic prosperity, and social honour and lustre. And the children would be for the yajamana, the teacher, for study. 
708 :Young and learned woman, you are inviolable like the light of the sun, brilliant and enlightening. May the teachers of the Aditya order of 48 years, with the jagati verses, give you unto me as wife. 
709 :Young man of learning, you are firm and invincible like the light of the sun, brilliant in character and behaviour. May the teachers of the Aditya order of 48 years, with the jagati verses, give you unto me as husband. Give me children, world fame, good health, economic prosperity and brilliance of well-being. And the children would be for the yajamana, a brilliant teacher, for study. 
710 :Blessed girl, you are firm and strong as the universal spirit of life among living beings, darling of space in all the directions. May all the learned sages and brilliant leaders of the world, with the anushtup verses, give you unto me as wife. 
711 :Blessed young man, firm and strong as the vital link of life among living beings, admired of everybody in all the directions, may all the learned sages and brilliant leaders of the world, with the anushtup verses, give you unto me as husband. Bless me with children, glory, health, economic prosperity and intellectual brilliance, and the pride of heroic motherhood. And the children would be for the yajamana, the teacher preceptor of truth, for study. 
712 :Mother teacher, you are the giver of knowledge for the girl-child, your disciple. Let the disciple receive your body of knowledge with observance of the discipline of ‘brahmacharya’ (celibacy and austerity). 
713 :Let the mother give the big, sacred, earthen sacrificial tray to the disciples to mix and cook the materials and prepare these for the fire of yajna. 
714 :Brahmachari/Brahmacharini, may the teachers of the first order of Vasus of 24 years standing, with gayatri verses, like the vitality of pranas, strengthen you with nourishing and delicious foods. 
715 :May the scholars of the higher order of Rudras of 36 years standing, with trishtup verses, like science, enlighten you with scientific method and discriminative knowledge. 
716 :May the scholars of the highest order of Adityas of 48 years standing, with jagati verses, like the purest air of the sky, temper you with right conduct and behaviour. 
717 :May the versatile scholars and men of wide experience of the world, with anushtup verses, like the vibrations of electric currents, vitalize you with inspiring advice and discussion. 
718 :May Indra, man of power in governance, train you in the art of management and administration. May Varuna, man of right choice, give you the right vision and will in practical ethics and politics of value. May Vishnu, man of comprehensive knowledge and yoga, train you in the practice of personal and collective yoga and yajna of cooperation and common pursuits. 
719 :Innocent child, may the noble teachers, distinguished among the scholars of the world, at a settled place on the earth probe and open out your mind for development like the heat of fire. 
720 :Intelligent girl, may the wives of scholars, distinguished among scholars of the world, at a distinguished school on the earth, hold you in their care like the breath of life. 
721 :Ambitious girl, may the women of science and word-power, distinguished among scholars of the world, light up your will and intelligence like the vitality of their own life. 
722 :Industrious girl, keen for the wealth of knowledge like a yajna vessel, may the noble teachers, eminent among distinguished scholars of the world in the field of science, in a reputed school of the world, enlighten you and temper you to perfection like the light of the sun. 
723 :Brilliant girl, may the scholars of Vaidic knowledge, noble and distinguished among scholars of the world, in some reputed institution of the world, enlighten you to fullness of resistance and action like the currents of electricity. 
724 :Dedicated girl, may the noble women of distinction, eminent among the scholars of the world, most meritorious and flying high in achievement, generous as teachers refine you and distil your human quality to perfection like the nectar of juices in the lap of mother earth in an ideal institution. 
725 :Dear girl, be with them and learn, and grow to human perfection. 
726 :Lady of the house, honour and safeguard the old and auspicious wealth and reputation of your noble husband, friend and supporter of all and an admirable man of generosity and hospitality. 
727 :Lady of the house, your noble husband, brilliant and generous like the sun, of long arms, beautiful hands and lovely fingers, with his strength and potency may bless you with conjugal joy and children. You too, without fear or trouble, may fill the earth in all direction with hope and expectation. 
728 :Enlightened girl, arise, and having risen, be great and stay firm. 
729 :Friend, dear groom, I give unto you this noble and generous girl for wife wholly and exclusively for a free and fearless life. Never have any reservations with her, never entertain any differences with her as a matter of faith and trust. 
730 :the inspiring gayatri verses, kindle you like fire. May the scholars of the higher order of Rudras, with the enlightening trishtup verses, enlighten and firm you up, like pranic energy, in the triple discipline of knowledge, action and worship. May the scholars of the highest order of Adityas, like the sun, brighten you up with the jagati verses of world vision. May all the noble saints and sages of the world, with the elevating anushtup verses, enliven and sanctify you like the distilled essences of nature’s powers. 
731 :With truth of word and action, light the fire which inspires to courageous thinking and collective decision. 
732 :With truth and honesty of social behaviour, light up the inner vitality which inspires the mind to will and the intellect to analyse and understand the problems of life. 
733 :With honest social action, promote the agni, social will, which inspires chitta, instrument of knowledge, to think and preserve the knowledge already gained. 
734 :With truth of word and honesty of commitment, maintain the fire which inspires you to proclaim the truth in speech and to safeguard it in memory and tradition. 
735 :Keep up the fire of inspiration, action and enthusiasm for the preservation and promotion of agni (fire and energy, both physical and mental), lighted, used and applied in personal yoga and collective action in the service of Prajapati, lord of the created world, Manu, men of thought, research and meditation, Agni, the enlightened leaders of the world, and Vaishwanara, the omnipresent Life of existence — the Supreme. 
736 :(Keep up the fire, for the fire, in the service of Fire, Agni). 
737 :Let the people of the world opt for the love and friendship of the leading Light of the world. Let them all gird up their loins, take up arms for the wealth of the world and win the prize of honour and prosperity with truth of word and deed. This is how you flourish. 
738 :Mother, alienate us not from learning. Hurt us not to ruin. Proud and bold, be valiant and take us to the end of the job with success. Mother and father/ Mother and child, doing thus bold and fine together like Agni, fire and the sun, you will accomplish the task on hand. 
739 :Noble woman of knowledge and brilliance, generous as mother earth, be strong and firm for the sake of peace and joy. By your own virtue, with food and water, you have realized the power vibrant in pranic energy. Pure and unsullied, rise in this home yajna and help us grow. The food you have prepared for the yajna and the knowledge you have gathered,may it be a gift for all the people. 
740 :Noble young man, living on herbs and fruits for food, and the fragrance of distilled ghee from yajna for ‘drink’ (breathing), a yajnic of long standing, choice of the good, son of a bold and courageous man, wonderful of nature, character and performance, rise in this home yajna of the family for growth in peace and joy. 
741 :Virgin girl of excellence, on marriage, leave those you have departed from, and come, join those who are here on this side. Support and defend those wherever I am. If there was anything low or mean earlier, give up that, and adopt and uphold the values of our family. 
742 :Agni, young man of excellence, best of social supporters, most loved of the people, come here from afar on a chariot of fire for this excellent girl, join her, and with her overcome the hurdles of your life. 
743 :Yadagne kani kani cid a te daruni dadlimasi. Sarvam tadastu te ghrtam tajjusasva yavisthya. 
744 :Young man/woman, brilliant like fire, whatever things are for you, all those we place on the shelf. Accept and take all that as fire accepts the oblations of ghee. All that is ours is yours. All that is yours is ours too. 
745 :Young man/woman of excellence, brilliant as fire, whatever the woman/man of controlled taste and tongue eats, and howsoever her/his breath flows in and out, all that is yours, for you. That is for your love and joy. Take all that as fire consumes the oblations. 
746 :Agni, learned man of justice and brilliance, just as we bear lovely green grass for a horse in the stables every day, so we bear good and wholesome food and other things to this fair and just house-holder as his partners in good deeds of Dharma. May we, enjoying ourselves with plenty of food and energy, health and wealth with him, never injure the honour and reputation of this noble man out of jealousy. 
747 :When the fire is lit in the vedi in the heart of the land and the battle is raging for abundance and prosperity and for high national honour, we call upon agni, a fiery leader with electric action, victorious in battle and of tremendous endurance, himself a man of plenty and prosperity, admirable of character and adorable in performance. (We call upon such a man to lead the nation.) There are the forces up against in arms, large, swift and ready to strike. There are the thieves and the smugglers. All these that are there, I throw into the flames of fire. President of the Council, commander of the army, you do the same. 
748 :Ruler of the land, Chief of law and order, tear the night-walkers and highway men with the fangs of punishment, crush the robbers and smugglers with the jaws of justice. Seize and hold the thieves and grabbers of others’ rights and property with the chains of law. You eliminate them all. 
749 :Chief of law and order, those who commit despicable acts in the public, rob and smuggle in the forests, and commit crimes in high and hiding places and live a life of sin and crime, all these I put into the court of your justice. 
750 :Ruler of the land, if a person maligns us out of hostility, or hates us out of jealousy, or speaks ill of us out of contempt, or deceives us to injure and destroy us, reduce all that hate, anger and negativity to ashes. 
751 :I am the high-priest of the yajamana, foremost in his creative and constructive projects. May the yajamana’s knowledge of the Veda and mine be commendable. May his strength and prowess and mine be admirable. May his power and dominion and mine be great and praise-worthy. 
752 :I am the high-priest of the yajamana. With my knowledge and science of the Veda, I overcome the strength of arms, power and valour, honour and lustre of the others, i.e., thieves, robbers and cut-throats, etc., reduce their strength to nullity, and raise our honour and lustre high. 
753 :Lord of food and energy, bless us with food, nourishing, invigorating, free from pollution and pleasing to taste. Bless the giver, the yajamana, to advance and attain fulfilment and prosperity. Give us energy both for humans and the animals. 
754 :Agni, Lord of Light, Light Itself, the Sun, explodes into light and illuminates the earth and reveals all the objects on the earth. The self-luminous lord, Himself the immortal seed of life, for His own glory and joy of the creatures, creates forms of indestructible life with foods as means and support of life. And He it is who creates the man of knowledge and vision (to show the divine path of life to others). 
755 :The night and the dawn, one dark, the other luminous, both different in form but of equal mind, together nurse one child, the sun, like two mothers. The self-luminous agni, light and life of the universe — of which the sun is a child — pervades both the earth and the heavens. All the powers of nature which sustain and invigorate life hold on to agni, the central life and spirit. 
756 :Savita, lord of light and life, the sun, choice of all, watches all and inspires all. It lights up the dawn and illuminates and reveals all the forms of existence. It creates the means of life and support for the humans and the animals, and lights up the heavens above. 
757 :Man of knowledge and of the power of knowledge, you are like a celestial bird with beautiful wings and a high-flying soul: threefold virtue of knowledge, action and divine worship is your head and brain by which you ward off the miseries of others. The knowledge of gayatri verses is your eye and vision. Brihad-rathantara sama verses are like your wings, something like a chariot by which you can cross the rivers of misery. Rigveda is your soul. The chhanda verses of the Veda are like the limbs of your body. The verses of Yajurveda are like your name and identity. Samaveda is like your body. The do’s and dont’s of the Vamadevya Samans are like your back bone. The roll of your voice is like your claws. You are like the divine eagle, Garuda, majestic and magnanimous. You are the sun, master of grandeur. Rise to the heavens. Find the bliss of heaven. 
758 :Brilliant man of expansive knowledge, you are an instrument of Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the world, bom to eliminate the jealous rivals. Study the gayatri verses, use the power revealed in there, go and expand over the earth, cooperate with the earth, work on its resources, and develop the wealth and prosperity of the land. 
759 :Noble scientist, you are a co-worker with omnipresent nature, born to defeat the proud and jealous forces inimical to growth. Study the trishtubh verses for knowledge and power for threefold comfort of body, mind and soul and, flying on the wings of that knowledge, cover the skies to explore and exploit the resources of the sky. 
760 :Tempestuous scientist and astronaut, you are a friend of agni, universal electric energy, born to eliminate the failures and adversities of the internal and external life. Study the jagati verses for the knowledge of light and space and, on the wings of that knowledge, reach the heavens. Cooperate with space and light energy, cooperate with universal energy and conquer the inner darkness with the light, and external failures with knowledge. 
761 :Steady man of technology, you are an instrument of eternal energy meant to serve as well as exploit the natural resources of the environment and eliminate the enemies who stem your growth. Go forward in and over all the directions on the earth and around on the wings of anushtubh verses, work with and on the currents of wind and energy and dominate over the directions to create one world on the earth in a healthy environment. 
762 :Agni roars like thunder in the sky and proclaims itself. Colourfully vitalizing the trees it caresses and blesses the earth with beauty and fruit. Properly lighted, it shines bright and immediately makes itself known. Between the earth and the heavens it blazes with its own splendour like the sun. 
763 :(Just as agni is radiant and benevolent with its own majesty, so should the ruler/President of the republic be brilliant with his own qualities of nature, character and actions and bless the people with his grace and benevolence. Only a person of benevolence and brilliance deserves to be the ruler.) Agni, brilliant and blazing presence abiding before us, generous man of knowledge, come blessing us with health and longevity, lustre of life, children and family, wealth and prosperity, acquisition and fulfilment, discriminative intelligence, beauty and dignity of life, and all-round growth and progress. 
764 :Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power/Man of natural and material science, come and visit us a hundred times with your acts and gifts. And may the blessings of your visits and gifts be a thousandfold for us. With the strength and support of your promoters, recreate and supplement for us whatever we might have lost in knowledge or natural and material wealth. Rebuild and regain for us whatever honour and prestige we might have lost or compromised. 
765 :Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge/Man of knowledge and science, come, return your visits with the gifts of food and energy, health and age. Save us from sin and evil deeds again and again, and inspire us to do great things. 
766 :Agni, brilliant power/Enlightened sages, come with all the wealth, come with gifts of that language and that intelligence which holds for us all the means and materials of comfort and prosperity. Come, and help us grow in all directions of life. 
767 :A tvaharsamantarabhurdhruvastisthavicacalih. Vis as tv a saw a vahchantu md tvadrastram- adhibhrasat. 
768 :Agni/Ruler of the land, we accept you and conduct you to the council as the ruler. Grace the seat of your office, be firm and stay inviolable. All the people accept and honour you. Let the land and the nation, under your control, never fail and fall to ruin. 
769 :Varuna, lord of freedom and bondage, Ruler of the land, power of law and liberty, loosen and untie our chains of bondage of the highest, medium and the lowest order and let them drop from us. And then O Sun, lord of majesty, we shall be free from evil, crime and sin and, dedicated to the vows of your discipline and law, we shall serve our land of inviolable freedom and integrity. 
770 :Agni, the sun, great, first and foremost, positioned over and above the dawn, comes forth from the dark and rises with all its glory. Resplendent with its wonderful beams which adorn it like brilliant limbs of its personality, it expands over the regions of the world, dispels the darkness and illuminates them all over with its light. (So should the ruler, first and great among the brilliant people of the land, come forth with the greatness of his personality, illuminate the land and glorify all the people.) Hansa is the great soul that destroys evil. It exists in purity. It lives in all and all live in it. It fills the skies and expresses in holy work. It is the giver and receiver of oblations in yajna. It sits in the vedi and in the earth. It is rambling around as a venerable visitor. It stays in the home and in the sky and all through the seasons. It rules over people and commands the commanders. It is with and above the best of people. It lives in truth and in virtuous conduct. It is in space and in the heart. It is in the waters and in the vitality of prana, and it creates the waters and the vitality. It activates the senses, moves the animals and magnetizes the earth. It creates the universal law and abides in it. It forms the mountains and the clouds and it showers with the rain. It is the truth and dynamic reality of existence, and it is great over all. 
771 :(It is the man of such an individual soul, inspired by the attributes of the great supreme soul, who deserves to be the ruler.) Agni/Ruler/individual soul, you know all the ways of the world. Sit in the lap of this mother earth/ mother-land/mother. Don’t hurt her with the heat of your power and passion. Don’t dazzle her with the beams of your knowledge. Light of knowledge and power of vitality, be in the heart of the mother and shine there with the light of life. 
772 :Omniscient Agni/All knowing wide-awake ruler of the land, brilliant with your own light in your place in the world/dominion, blazing with your power and glory, be good and kind to the people. 
773 :Agni, ruler of the land, having been good and kind to us, the people, sit at peace undisturbed. And then, having rendered all the regions of the land in all directions safe and secure in the good life, be comfortable with satisfaction in your own office of justice and governance. 
774 :Agni, the sun, first rises over the heavens. Then it rises over us all illuminating our world. Third, it emerges in the pranic energies of nature, in the waters and in the mind of humanity — thus illuminating and activating everything and every mind from within. The pious and the devout people invoke, light and worship Agni, perpetual power, spirit and light of the world. 
775 :(Just as Agni is the power, spirit and light of the world, so should the ruler be. And so should he/she vitalize and illuminate the people, and so should the people adore him/her.) Vidmd te’agne tredha traydni vidmd te dhama vibhrta purutra. Vidmd te ndma paramam guild yad vidmd tamutsam yata ’ ajagantha. 
776 :Agni, light, energy and power of the world, let us know the three orders of the three powers of yours (heat, light and electricity). Lord of majesty, love and favourite of all, let us explore and know the various forms and places where you exist, which you support and which support you. Let us know that supreme name and the thing you are in the essence which is hidden in a mysterious cave. Let us discover the spring, the water and the cloud from where you issue forth in formal existence (so that we may be blest with the power and prosperity which follows the discovery and the applications). 
777 :Agni, light and life of the world, a leader of thought among men, as I am, I discover and light you in the oceans. A visionary of humanity, I discover you in the foods, in the vapours and in the clouds. In the third region of the heavens of light, abiding in the solar sphere, in the dawn and in the heart of steam and flowing waters, great men discover, light and develop you. 
778 :Agni, light and energy of life, roaring as lightning, reverberates in the skies with an explosion. Lighted well all-round and immediately blazing, it shines and illuminates everything. Between the heaven and the earth it shines with the beams of its own brilliance. The light reaches the earth, energizes the soil and emerges in the beauty of vegetation. 
779 :Generous lord of the light and glory of life, spirit of the graces of nature, sustainer of wealth and beauty, source of desire and fulfilment, guardian of the sweetness, joy and greenery of the earth, haven and mainstay of the world, child of the very force and victory of life, brilliant in the dynamics of existence, He blazes in splendour before the dawns. Such is Agni. (Such should be the ruler.) Light of the world, going everywhere, seed of life, rising as the sun, illuminating the earth and heaven, breaker of the darkest cloud, hallowed and consecrated by the people and the energies of nature, such is Agni. (Such should be the ruler in his domain.) Immortal agni, lovely and lovable, pure and purifier, intelligent and self-conscious, a holy presence, is existent in men and women. The same throws up the fiery smoke upward and with instantaneous light illuminates the sun and heaven. 
780 :Agni, immortal light and vitality of existence, brilliant, golden glorious, explodes in heaven and illuminates everything with the earth. In love, as if, with the beauty of the world, it assumes various forms of self-assertive and inviolable life. And yet that Heavenly Power which creates this agni and brings it into existence is another, the Eternal Life of life and Light of light. 
781 :and ever youthful, whosoever may well prepare and faithfully offer for you rich and sumptuous food as sacrifice to-day, shower on him/her the gift of your light and take that favourite of the gods across to the world of joy. 
782 :Men of knowledge, wisdom and expertise, celebrate agni and promote it among the famous and the prosperous. Sing of it in verses of praise on the auspicious and admirable occasions of yajna. It is dear to the men of heat and light and the sun. Promote it with the hopes and actions of your children. Promote it with the hopes and aspirations of those who are yet to be born. 
783 :Agni, lord of fire and science, the experts of yajna dedicated to you, with the use of fire and your blessings, daily pursue and achieve all the desired objects of the world. Men of reason, intelligence and will, desirous of wealth, choose for research and work on the cowshed and the cloud with the rays of the sun for the realisation of progress and prosperity. 
784 :Agni, worshipped by seers and sages, is the darling of humanity, auspicious and adorable. Omnipresent, universal and all-commanding, it is the guardian and promoter of the means of life, peace and joy. We invoke the powers of earth and heaven — powers free of hate and jealousy and sources of bliss. Great men of the world, brilliant and generous, guardians of the peace and prosperity of life, generate and hold for us the wealth and power of life and polity which creates a great nation and fearless humanity. 
785 :(Agni is an ‘atithi’, a chance guest, which comes at its own will whenever it comes. Serve it with the best of offerings you have.) Light and serve agni (fire) with fuel and fragrant materials. Wake it up, raise it with ghee and other sumptuous offerings as you would feed a venerable chance visitor. Offer the best of yajna into the fire. 
786 :(Like the fire of yajna, serve the man of light and knowledge with the best you can offer for food and gifts whenever such a venerable person happens to visit you.) Agni, of lovely forms of manifestation and lord of infinite light and wisdom, may all the noble and generous people of the world serve and celebrate you with the best of intention, devotion and acts of worship. May Agni, light of the universe, be good and kind to us all. (May the man of knowledge and wisdom be good and kind to us all as such persons are agni in human form.) Agni, lord of light and life, come forth to bless us with the gracious beams of light and warmth of life. Burning and blazing with the mighty flames of fire, hurt (As Agni, so should the ruler and the commander of the army be mighty and blazing with splendour, always protective but never unjust and hurtful.) Agni roars and thunders like lightning in the sky as it proclaims its presence on the earth. Joining every bit of life and vegetation, it inspires all forms of existence with passion and vitality and thus manifests itself, protecting and promoting life. And it goes on blazing with its mighty splendour from the earth below to the highest heaven. 
787 :(So does the scholar with his knowledge, the ruler with his power, and the commander with his force, shine and blaze all round, protecting, promoting and inspiring the nation and the environment with freedom, passion and enthusiasm). 
788 :This agni, ruler/commander of the forces, attends to the affairs of the state, and, distinguished with great knowledge and brilliance of character, shines forth like the sun. He stands firm every way by the state and the nation in the battles of life and defence. Dear and favourite of the good, intelligent and generous people, moving around among the people like a visitor, may he be good, kind and beneficent to us and shine. 
789 :Celestial waters, receive this light of agni, this ray of light, this seed of life. Keep it and nourish it in some soft, fragrant and beautiful region of freedom. Wives of the most virtuous order of character, honour and bow to it to receive it. Bear it in the vapours of space as a mother bears a child in the womb. 
790 :Agni, seed of life, the soul with the subtle and the causal body, your home is in the celestial waters of space. You love to grow in existence with the herbs, and thence, placed in the mother’s womb, are born again. 
791 :Agni, light of life, seed with the subtle and the causal body, you are a child of the herbs. You are a child of the plants and trees. You are a child of the entire forms of life in existence. You are a child of the waters of earth and heaven. 
792 :Soul, light of consciousness and seed of life, through the ashes of the funeral pyre you rise to a new home in the celestial waters of space. Then you come down to the earth to be with the forms of herbs. And then you come in to the mother’s womb and are born again in a new body. 
793 :Agni, soul with the desire and will to live in the forms of existence, again and again you come to find a place in the celestial waters of space. Again and again you descend to the earth to attain herbal forms of life. Then again you enter the mother’s womb and rest there to grow as a part of her life within. When you are bom, you sleep in her lap in peace and joy. Noble soul, be good to the mother, be the darling of her love, joy and fulfilment. 
794 :Agni, come again with energy, come with food, come with health and vitality for a long age. Come again and again, save us from sin and evil. 
795 :Agni, come with wealth and honour. Come with a shower of all round nourishment and universal energy to the point of satisfaction and satiation for all and help us grow, develop and progress. Come with food for body and mind. 
796 :Agni, intent listener, most youthful man/woman of independent and comfortable means, understand the sense and meaning of this great word of mine, important, worthy of attention and expressive of deep meaning with further implications. Let anyone denigrate you, let someone praise you, I am your admirer, and I appreciate and value your health of body and intelligence of mind. 
797 :Agni, man of wealth and honour, creator and generous giver of power and prosperity, intelligent lord of knowledge, know for us the truth of life and existence and, in truth of word and deed, fight out our negativities and eliminate our hostilities for the achievement of success in all the affairs of life. 
798 :Agni, creator and giver of wealth and honour, may the brahmacharis and scholars of the Vasu, Rudra and Aditya order light you up in the vedi again and again. May the devotees of the lord of existence and masters of the science of yajna promote your gifts with the performance of yajna. Agni, power of light and life, grow on in your operations with the oblations of ghee and fragrant materials so that the plans and ambitions of the yajamana be fulfilled. 
799 :Apeta vita vi ca sarpatato ye ’tra stha purana ye ca nutanah. Adad yamo’vasanam prthivya’ akrannimam pitaro lokamasmai. 
800 :The teachers who are old and those who are new and the parents and other seniors who are here on the earth, all should realise and actualise for young aspirants the knowledge of this world. The judge of the aspirants’ performance may grant them the certificate of completion and graduation in achievement. Hence keep away from Adharma (injustice and untruth), go on firmly with Dharma (truth and justice), and realise it without delay here and now. 
801 :Agni, man of knowledge, having passed through the crucibles of fire like ash, you are knowledge itself, full and complete like the orb of the sun and powerful like the force of electricity. May your plans, intentions and aspirations pass on to me as mine. 
802 :Be wide-awake, collect knowledge from all round, go forward and take it to the heights. Be cooperative, mutually dependent, collectively self-dependent. Take to knowledge and to the teachers. 
803 :This is that agni, vital heat of life, in which Indra, the sun, as if in love with life, places the nectar of life, Soma, like the distilled and delicious food for a thousand people. Life of life, Jataveda, generous giver as you are, you are worshipped by the devotees in your own right. 
804 :It is for the love of life that I absorb the same nectar of life into my body system. It is for the same love of life that I hold on to my darling wife and I enjoy my food and drink. 
805 :Agni, light of the universe, life of existence, power and presiding presence of the world, lord of yajna and friend of the yajniks, the glory that is yours shines in the heavens, vibrates in the earth, blooms in the herbs and breathes in the waters. It is the same by which the skies are pervaded and expanded. It blazes as the sun, it rolls as the oceans of space, and it watches our human performance as the universal eye. 
806 :(Let the scholar and the teacher attain the knowledge of the universal spirit, nature and life in existence and, like agni among human beings, impart the same to his/her disciples.) Agni, man of knowledge and light of the world, your knowledge reaches unto the waters of heaven and you proclaim that knowledge to the bold and the best among intelligent people who impart it to their disciples. It covers the waters which float in the luminous sphere of the sun and studies the vapours and energy vibrant on this side of the sun and beyond. 
807 :All men and women of the world, experts in knowledge and blest with virtue, brilliant and energetic like agni (fire and electricity), living together with mutual love and shared qualities of enlightenment, free from hate, jealousy, fear and all physical and mental ailments, dedicate themselves to yajna (creative and constructive cooperative activities) and enjoy great plenty and prosperity of high order in life. 
808 :Agni, light of life/brilliant man of knowledge, may your light, knowledge and intelligence be for our share. Create for us and help us create wealth of cows, plenty of milk, food and energy, divine speech, vision and wisdom for all time for the sake of yajna and the yajniks. May we beget children capable of mighty deeds and achievements. And may the brilliant teacher bless our children with universal wealth of existence and the vision of divinity. 
809 :Ay am te yonirrtviyo yato jato ’ arocathah. Tain janannagna ’a rohatha no vardhaya rayim. 
810 :Agni, man of pure soul and brilliant character like light and fire, dear son, this is your place/home of birth where, born at the right auspicious time, you shine by your life and conduct. Know this, rise high and help us advance in wealth, prosperity, honour and happiness. 
811 :Son/Daughter, you are knowledgeable, well aware and intelligent. Stay firm in this place of yours sitting close with that noble soul like the breath of life. Master/Mistress you are all round versatile. Stay firm in your place sitting close with the noble spirit of your Dharma and Karma. Be firm with the spirit of omniscience, giver of all wealth and joy. 
812 :Fill up, serve and complete this life. If there is any loophole, plug it. If there is any short-coming, overcome it, advance and excel. In this field of knowledge and action, may Indra and Agni, father and mother, nurture you with instruction and advice. May Brihaspati, the teacher, guardian of divine knowledge and good conduct, guide and confirm you in virtue. Be strong and stay firm in your place. 
813 :Blooming women of beauty and grace, wives of noble people, in this wonderful paradisal phase of their cultured home life, milk the dappled cows and prepare and season delicious foods with the dressing of soma. They create sweetness and joy in all the three phases of time, past, present and future, and are blest with noble and promising children. 
814 :All the sacred voices of truth inspire and exalt Indra, man of power and glory, wide and rolling as the sea, supreme hero of the chariots and battles of life, protector of truth and Dharma, and promoter of life and its prosperity. 
815 :(The brahmacharis and brahmacharinis, who complete their education with the sacred voice of the Veda and the words of truth written and spoken by the Rishis, rise in life, and when they marry in the vaidic way, they raise families which grow in happiness and prosperity.) Wedded couple, two-in-one joined in love, brilliant in health and lustre, of equal and enlightened mind, decent and graceful in clothes and ornaments, both of you together plan, act and realise your goal in food, energy, prosperity, honour and glory. 
816 :Wedded couple, I join you as two-in-one in life and sanctify you with identical thoughts, intentions and operations, identical vows of plans, actions and achievements, and identical memories, values and aspirations. 
817 :Agni, noble teacher, high-priest of yajna, be our super-guide and guardian. Create, hold and sustain for the yajamana couple nourishment, energy, honour and prosperity. 
818 :Agni, Lord of knowledge, light and power of yajna, rich in spirit, science and materials, and presiding priest of all round growth, you are dedicated to the earth and the laws of life. Rise, move abroad and, having created peace and prosperity in all directions, come and grace your super-seat of guidance. 
819 :Wedded couple, both of you be of good mind and thought toward us. Be of noble equanimity and blissful intention for us. Be free of pride, arrogance and negativity. Violate not yajna, nor Dharma, nor the yajnapati. Reborn as master and mistress of the knowledge of creation (as children of Agni), be good and kind to us right now. 
820 :Just as the earth like a mother holds the vital heat for the nourishment of life in her womb, so does a woman worthy of love and recognition hold a brilliant soul in her womb till maturity. May Lord Vishwakarma (maker of the world), father and guardian of His children (Prajapati), with gifts and nourishment from all the seasons and powers of nature, deliver her of a noble offspring. 
821 :Nir-riti, spirit of adversity, desire to catch the stingy and the miserly who does not perform the yajna and does not extract the soma for libations. Pursue the thief and the smuggler and catch him on the way. Go to someone other than me. That is your desired object and action. Salutations to you, power of justice. 
822 :Power of eternal law, eternal felicity and adversity, your splendour is awful. You go with the law and are one with the law. Salutations to you. Undo the iron-chains of slavery and take this yajamana to the heights of heavenly bliss. 
823 :Awful spirit of adversity, eternal felicity, ever- abiding with the law, I offer the oblations into your mouth/ in the yajna vedi for the breaking of the chains of existence. Ordinary folks play with you in a state of wanton negligence, feeling that you are the all forbearing earth. But I know you well for what you are, spirit of justice, as the mother of felicity as well as the power of retribution. 
824 :Yajamana, the inexorable chain which the spirit of adversity, in full justice, had tied round your throat for want of yajna, I undo from the centre of your life right away. Regenerated through yajna, eat of this holy food. The spirit of generosity has done this miracle. Salutations to the spirit of generosity. 
825 :Who is a noble yajamana? A successful householder (grihasthi)? The man of vitality who takes a wife, makes a home, creates wealth and contributes to life like Savita, the creator; who watches and illuminates all forms of life on earth with his eyes like the sun, and manages various developments with his acts like Indra, the leader; who is firm in true Dharma and stands inviolable in the battles of the pathmakers of the world — such a man is the right yajamana and a noble house-holder. 
826 :Men of vision and intelligence use the plough and the yoke. The men of constancy among the brilliant and the generous separately as well as together devoutly in peace expand the beauty and graces of life and knowledge. 
827 :Work with the plough and yoke the horses/ bullocks. Expand the agriculture and its methods, tools and knowledge. Prepare the soil and sow the seed. In accordance with the knowledge of agriculture develop many kinds of produce of the richest order. And when the grains are ripe for harvesting, reap and bring the harvest home for all of us. 
828 :Let the plough-shares turn the soil well. Let the farmers merrily follow the bullocks while they till the land and sow the seeds. May the sun and the air supplemented by the oblations of rich materials bless the herbs and plants with delicious fruit and nourishing grain. 
829 :Let the furrow in the field, made by the ploughshare and levelled and refined by the leveller, accepted and approved by all the noble and generous people and vitalized by winds and rain, be enriched with water, ghee, sugar and honey. Energized and enriched thus with food, the field may yield for us a wealth of delicious nourishment. 
830 :The plough, fitted with the share, symbol of peace and joy, a tool of soma—plenty, prosperity and happiness — drawn by horses or bullocks and held firmly by the hilt, turns up the crust of the kind and generous earth to make it ready for sowing. 
831 :Mother of fulfilment and source of satisfaction, generous earth/furrow of the field/holy cow, let the desires be fulfilled for friends, noble scholars and guests, persons of power and glory, the people, powers of health and pranic energies, and for the growth of herbs and trees. 
832 :Be free from poverty, ill-health and ignorance. Let us be rich with the holy inviolable cows for nourishment and prosperity. May we cross this darkness and attain to the light of the sun and the glory of life. 
833 :The year goes with the divisions of time, the dawn is one with the ruddy morning, the pranic energies express themselves in the actions of nature and of living beings, the sun shines and radiates light with its rays, the vital heat loves the earth, the libations of yajna and the voice of the Veda. 
834 :(So should the people live together with one another. So should the husband and wife live a common shared life, complementing and supplementing each other in an integrated life.) Earlier, three years before in the three seasons, whatever herbs such as soma etc. grew out of the earth with other natural powers such as water, air and sunlight, I should know: the hundred and seven varieties of these brown ones for the treatment of hundred and seven ailments which affect hundred and seven vital spots in the body. 
835 :Mother earth, mother of herbs, hundreds are the places where the herbs grow, and thousands are the roots by which they grow into innumerable varieties. Then, O physicians of a hundred specialities of ailments and scholars of a hundred varieties of herbs, come you all and render this body and community of mine free from all disease. 
836 :All of you men and women, herbs, creepers and plants such as soma, in full bloom, rich in fruit and medicine, fast and victorious over disease take you across all ailments and sorrow. Use them, be healthy and strong and, like the victorious men of horse, rejoice and be grateful to them. 
837 :Herbs and medicinal plants, as mothers, are of divine efficacy. They nourish and save like mothers. Hence I pray for you all: Lord of Life, Supreme Soul, may I by divine grace have the gift of horses, cows, clothes and home, and a healthy body. 
838 :Men and women of the earth, you reside in a body which may or may not last till to morrow. Your life rests like a drop of dew on the leaf. Take the gifts of the earth and look after the soul in the body with herbs and medicines to live a full life. 
839 :Wherever medicinal herbs such as soma grow, there go as brave warriors go to the battlefield against the enemy. That person of intelligence and expertise who fights disease and destroys the anti-life forces is called the physician, the person who cures. 
840 :Medicinal herb is that which is powerfully efficacious, nourishing and rejuvenating, strengthening and lustrously invigorating. Physician, know and find all such herbs for the health and immunity of the sick and the needy. 
841 :O man, the invigorating power and fragrance of vitality of the herbs which are ever keen to give health and lustre to your body and soul issues forth from them just as cows issue forth from the cow-shed (anxious to feed their calves). 
842 :Know the medicine which, as mother, serves your life with healing and, like the flowing streams, repay the debt by completing the development of the science of healing by herbs. Whatever causes disease and loss of health, remove from the paths of life. 
843 :When a thief attacks a cowpen, he is challenged and warded off by the master. So do medicinal herbs, universal in their growth and presence, challenge whatever ailment attacks the body like sin and destroy the ailments. 
844 :When I refine and strengthen these medicines and hold them in my hand, the very root of the consumptive ailment grabbing the vitality of the sick person is destroyed. 
845 :When the medicines spread over every part and every joint of the sick person, then, mighty and powerful, present in every cell of the body, they drive away the consumptive forces of disease, eliminating, as if, the enemy intruders of the body. 
846 :Physician, let the consumptive disease go off with every dose of medicine, with every new prescription, with every motion of the breath, and let it be eliminated along with the last trace of pain. 
847 :Physicians, of your medicines, let one supplement and protect the other and let the other in turn support and protect the former. Let all of them be thus mutually agreeable in proper proportion. Keep this word of mine as true and hold on to it. 
848 :and those which are without fruit, those which are rich in flowers and those which are without flowers, all of them are created by the Lord Creator. Let all of them, with proper treatment and preparation by the physician, protect us and free us from disease and pain. 
849 :May the physicians and the medicines protect us against ill-will, anathema and self-guilt. May they free us from water-borne diseases and those which are peculiar to the prosperous and the distinguished persons. May they release us from ailments caused by acts of indiscipline and breach of the rules of health and the good life. May they save us from all diseases caused by neglect or indulgence of the senses and the mind and those caused by frustration of the intellectuals. 
850 :d Mu <4 d Q^ctsaffd 84 y w U i M ^ Rfcillfd 11^ II The medicinal herbs come from heaven, the region of light and life. So say the wise. The person who feeds upon them never comes to any suffering. 
851 :Physician, of the many herbal medicines which are efficacious with a hundred properties and of which soma is the chief on top, you are the best judge for the peace of mind and achievement of the desired result. 
852 :The many herbal medicines with life-giving properties like soma, specially grown on the earth, are the blessed gifts of the Lord-giver of life, Brihaspati. Refined and vitalized by the physician, they may, we wish and pray, give health and vigour to this woman/ man. 
853 :Men and women of medicine, these herbs of which you and others hear around us, or which are close by, or those which come from afar, all these herbs, plants, creepers and trees together, we wish and pray, may give her/him the gift of health and vitality. 
854 :Whoever digs you (roots/minerals) out, may he/ she never injure/destroy you, nor should he/she come to any harm. Nor should the person for whom I (the physician) dig you out come to any harm. May all the bi-peds (humans) and all the quadrupeds (animals) of ours be free from suffering and disease. 
855 :Herbs and medicines alongwith their chief, soma, power of vitality, say: O Soma, king of herbs, whoever the patient for whom the learned physician has prepared the cure, let us take the person across the pain of suffering. 
856 :Herbal medicine is a destroyer, sure cure, of phlegmatic consumption, piles, hemorrhoids, swellings, chronic sores and numerous types of pulmonary disease. 
857 :O Gandharva, herbal medicine, the singer and artist searches for and discovers you. So does Indra, man of power and virility, Brihaspati, man of universal Vaidic lore, Soma, man of peace and blessed virtue, the ruler and the scholar. They all search for, discover, use and benefit from herbal medicines and free themselves from consumptive ailments. 
858 :Herbal medicine challenges disease. It resists the anti-life forces and overthrows the enemies of good health : Let the medicine resist all that causes sin and disease. It resists, fights out, defeats and eliminates the negativities and builds up the vitality and invincibility of the system for longevity. 
859 :Medicinal herb, may the person who searches, discovers, digs out and prepares the medicine be of long life. May the patient for whom I, the physician, prescribe, prepare and administer the medicine be of long life. May you (the herb) too be of long life and grow to rise into a hundred roots, shoots and branches. 
860 :Herbal medicine/Physician, you are supreme. All the trees (such as peepal and banyan) are subordinate to you as sources of medicine. Anyone who tries to suppress us, any disease that might weaken us, let that be under our control. (Strengthen us with health, vitality and courage of spirit.) The Lord who is the creator of the earth, who is the lord of the universal law of truth, who is the first of all and creator of the air, waters and the moons, and who pervades the heavens, whom we worship with the best homage of fragrant oblations, that lord of life may never hurt us with disease and ill-health. 
861 :Come earth, revolving with yajna and water, milk and food, again and again, continuously. And may agni, vital life-generating heat of nature, activated by the Lord creator of life, bless your fertility and increase your power of production. 
862 :Agni, vital energy of the universe, may we imbibe and internalize that power of your nature, character and function which is immaculate and generative, beautiful and blissful, pure and sacred, and worthy of service and worship through yajna for growth and development. 
863 :From Lord Agni and the fire of yajna (spiritual, mental and physical) I receive and imbibe food for life and energy for action. I receive and internalize the fluent voice of the mother of truth and Dharma. May all this food, energy and spirit enter, vitalize and strengthen my body, mind and sense, and may it invigorate my cows with fertility. 
864 :With all this food, energy and vitality I’d fight out and eliminate all pain, suffering, disease and debility. 
865 :Agni, lord of lustre, light of universal knowledge, man of supernal vision, let the adorable message of yours, youthful brilliance and splendid beams of light shine and radiate across the world. Whosoever celebrates you in yajna, you bless the yajamana giver with holistic nourishments and fullness of energy and vitality with additional food for yajna. 
866 :Agni, lord of light and splendour, pure as fire, clear and bright as sunbeams, full and complete, rising to the heights with the sun and pervading the spaces protects the heaven and earth like the son protecting the father and mother. 
867 :(Similarly the young brahmachari or brahmacharini, roaming around the sacred premises of his/her institute, grows high in the light and lustre of knowledge, pure as fire, clear as sunbeams, full and complete, and rises high like the sun. He/she protects his/her father and mother as the sun protects the heaven and earth.) Agni, child and protector of energy, lord of wealth and intelligence, lover and well-wisher of all, invoked, lighted and raised with devotion and hymns of praise, receive the libations, rejoice and grow. People of various hue, wonderfully favoured and secure in life, children of love and beauty, and sweet and dear by nature, offer food (As fire is invoked with love and devotion and fed with libations, so should the child be fed, nourished and helped to grow by parents and teachers with all the love and faith at their command so that the child not only lives and learns but also rejoices while he/she lives and learns.) Immortal Agni/man of action, invoked/inspired and rising in glory, rejoicing with people, create and expand the wealth of life for us all. Shining in the beauty and grace of your form in life, protect, promote and perfect the yajna of life which brings happiness, prosperity and all the blessings of existence. 
868 :Agni, lord of power and sustenance, you uphold who performs and promotes the yajnic programmes of creation, construction and development. You sustain the person who is intelligent and wide-awake. You protect the person who is settled in a peaceful home. You maintain the person who gives liberal amounts in charity. You are the preserver of the great and generous earth and its environment. You maintain a steady supply of food and energy. And it is you who protect and promote the ancient and traditional wealth of existence. 
869 :For the sake of peace, prosperity and joy, the people of former times have honoured and followed the human traditions of ages and you, Agni, lord of light and life, man of vision and excellence dedicated to Truth and Dharma, great, possessed of universal knowledge and experience, discreet listener and practical achiever and master of divine qualities of character. 
870 :Soma, ruler, man of grace and blessedness, rise and grow to excellence to win the glory of life. May the vitality, virility and grandeur of life come to you from all sides, and, in the battles of life and the nation, be great. 
871 :Soma, man of peace, power and joy, may all delicious waters, milk and juices come to you. May all vigour, virility and vitality come to you. May all food, energy and means of speedy and powerful defence be yours to break down the pride of the enemy forces. Growing mighty and mightier, and rising towards heaven and immortality, hold on to the highest words, thoughts and visions as food for the mind and soul. 
872 :Soma, man of widest fame and highest honour, happiest at heart and creator of joy all round, rise and shine with the beams of your excellence and be friends so that we all together may rise and advance in all directions. 
873 :Agni, lord of life, light and love, the devoted yajamana as a child of yours would divert his mind even from the most exciting places and, with the sweetest words of praise, come to concentrate on you as a calf runs to the mother cow even from the richest pasture. 
874 :Agni, most brilliant power of the universe, the entire humanity, even though they might be very well placed in life, converge on you, each for the fulfilment of his/her own special desire. 
875 :(Just as the children of the Lord creator approach Him with prayers for the fulfilment of their desires, so do the people of the land, even though well-placed in life otherwise, approach the ruler for the fulfilment of their requests.) Agni, sole and sovereign lord of the world, loved and worshipped by all that is born and all that is yet to be born, rules and blazes in his glory across the dearest and most beautiful regions of the universe. 
876 :(Just as Agni, bright and blazing with His glory, is the lord of the universe, so that person alone is worthy of being the ruler of a country who is brilliant by virtue of his/her mind and character, unique in performance, loved and respected by all and shining across the present and the possible future in all regions of the land.) First of all I dedicate my mind and soul to the Lord Almighty, Agni, lord of light and life, power and prosperity, and I instal the yajna-fire in my home for the gifts of vigour and valour, wealth and prosperity and a noble family. May all the divine powers, for sure, favour and bless me. 
877 :(Just as a house-holder or a student is dedicated to Agni, the Lord Almighty, and to agni, the yajna-fire, so too should he/she be dedicated to the agnis among the community, leading men and women of knowledge, wisdom and virtue who have specialised in various fields of knowledge and development.) Lord Almighty, infinite spirit and life of the universe, you are the centre-hold of waters and energy. 
878 :You are the original cause of heat and light. Surrounding and feeding the expansive oceans on earth and in space from all sides, you are great and ever greater in the intervening spaces between earth and heaven. And you reveal your glory by the measure and immensity of the light of heaven. 
879 :Brahma, infinite spirit of the universe, all-creator and omniscient, is the first and greatest reality of existence. Worthy of love and adoration, It is the highest object of desire for the wise. The great and glorious objects (such as the sun, the moon, the earth) which fill the skies in various regions of space are exemplary revelations of Its creative power. 
880 :In the beginning of creation, that Brahma, from the potential and law of Its own existence, invokes Prakriti, the original Nature which is the cause of all that is come into existence and also that which is yet to come into existence. 
881 :The One Lord of Light and the sole creator of lights such as the sun existed before creation (as He ever exists). He alone was and is the lord and sustainer of all forms of created being. He holds and sustains the earth and heaven and supports this whole universe. We worship the same one lord and offer Him homage with libations of fragrant materials. 
882 :That eternal, perfect and primordial joy (Ananda) which blesses and coexists with the earth, the heaven and the original cause of existence, Prakriti, the same joy which universally subsists with its origin, the sole creator, I adore with all my breath of life (five pranas), mind and soul. 
883 :For all those that move in space, and those which move on the earth, which move in the regions of heaven and those which move about in the sky between earth and heaven, for all these moving forms of existence Nature has provided food, the means of sustenance. 
884 :For all the arrows of the enemies of life, and those who damage the herbs and trees, being poachers and parasites, and those who sleep and wait in the obscure paths for victims, for all these surreptitious forms of moving life, a challenge and a thunderbolt! Or those negative forces that are in the heat of the solar region, or those in the rays of the sun, or those which have taken abode in the waters, to these moving forms of existence, a challenge to counter, overpower or destroy! Agni, ruler, your influence is fast, far and wide. Increase your strength and power and make it felt. Go like a shot over the earth as a king with his attendant forces. Cast your net of law instantly against the destructive elements and punish them with inescapable consequences. 
885 :Agni (ruler, commander of the forces, lord of justice), the flames of your fire blaze with awe. Pure and purifying with might and daring, fall upon the forces which burn and destroy life and society, and with libations unrestrained, release a rain of lightning terror striking in all directions. 
886 :there is a tormentor or a wicked maligner or a supporter of sin and crime far or near against you or against us, release the forces to seize him and remove the obstacles. Be the protector and guardian of this people/community. Let none bully or terrorize you and us. 
887 :Agni, lord of heat and light, leader of an advancing humanity, rise and grow. Let the light spread around. Wielder of the sharpest weapons and inviolable power, burn the enemies of life and human values. Blazing lord of fire and justice, if someone creates, supports or advances the selfish, ungenerous and ungracious forces, scorch him like a patch of dry shrubs. 
888 :Agni, lord of light and power, leader of humanity, rise and stay on top. Counter and ward off the enemies of mankind. Develop the best things which our saints and scholars have discovered and invented. Resist and reduce the strength of the opponents to nil. Eliminate the natural, traditional and customary enemies of society. I instal you in your seat with the baptism of light and fire. 
889 :This Agni, the sun, is the chief and summit of heaven. It is the father and sustainer of the earth and its life. It vitalizes and refreshes the waters of life for the earth and her children. So should you be, Ruler of the land. I anoint and consecrate you with the radiant power of Indra, the sun. 
890 :Agni is the leader and mover of the earth and its life, of the motions of wind and energy in the middle sphere, and of the cosmic yajna of creation. And there everywhere it is one with the blissful dynamics of existence. As it sends up its flames of fire bearing the light and fragrance of yajna, it holds its head high and wields the light of the sun in heaven. 
891 :(Similarly, O king, be the leader of the nation’s life on earth and the dignity and dynamics of the polity. Be the path-maker of the policies of peace, justice and happiness and hold your head high with words of enlightenment, creativity and joy for the people.) Spirit of the human nation, polity of the world, you are the centre-hold of dharma, enlightenment and peace, created, completed and blest by the Lord-maker of the world, Vishvakarma. Let not the seas hurt you. Let not the sky, sun and moon and the clouds hurt you. Unhurt, free and peaceful, develop, beautify and beatify the earth. 
892 :Spirit of humanity, mother of the commonwealth, lady of the polity, be open, free and accommodative, be expansive and celebrated. And may the creator of life, father of humanity, Prajapati, establish you with His blessings on the currents of rivers, on the paths of the seas, and over the currents of air in the sky. 
893 :Agni, light of the universe, vitality of nature, you are the being and existence, you are the mother-support, whole, inviolable, all sustaining and all-nourishing, centre-hold and wielder of all the regions of the world. Sustain, guide and raise the world, develop and expand the life on earth. Do not hurt the earth nor violate the life of her children. (As Agni is the life and support of the earth, so is the woman the mother of the home.) Lady of the home, may Agni, lord of light and life/your husband, the presiding presence of the home, fully protect and support you in every way for all the energy of life, prevention of suffering, best manners and behaviour, inner strength, dignity and recognition and virtuous conduct. In a state of perfect peace and well-being, with all the joys of life in a good home, stay firm and secure with Agni, the lord of life, and your husband, like Prakriti with Purusha and the light of the dawn with the day. 
894 :Lady of the home, delicate and graceful as the durva grass, just as the grass grows from one section of the stalk to another, from one knot of joint to another, so you too, grow in life, and let us grow and help us advance in life a hundred-fold and from thereon a thousand fold. 
895 :Lady light of the home, root and foundation of the yajna of family life, as you grow a hundred-fold and then you rise a thousand-fold, O noble and generous mother, we offer you love and reverence in homage with the best fragrant offerings. 
896 :Agni, those lights of yours which, in the solar region, illuminate the heavenly spaces with the sunbeams, with all those lights to-day bless us with enlightenment for the sake of our people. 
897 :(As Agni illuminates the heavens with the light of the sun, so should the teachers of men and women enlighten them with the light of their knowledge. What is the secret of Agni turning into light, and into light of the sun?) Divine powers of nature, your energy and vitality illuminates the sun and vitalizes the lives of animals like cows and horses. It also works in the motions of objects and the perceptions of the senses. 
898 :O Brihaspati, Lord omniscient of this mighty universe, may the heat and light of natural energy invest our vitality with all that power and energy. 
899 :knowledge and education, may our teachers like Indra and Agni in-form and in-vest our deep interest in life and nature with the hidden secrets of light, power and sensation as expressions of one universal natural energy (Prakriti). 
900 :The cosmic forms of the universe bear the light of the Lord. Self-luminant stars such as the sun bear the light as their own. 
901 :O lady of light and knowledge, noble teacher and torch-bearer, may the father of created beings, Prajapati, instal you in your seat on the face of the earth. Give full light of knowledge to others for the sake of full energy, safeguard against suffering, and all good qualities of nature, character and action. Agni, lord of light and life, is your master and guardian. Stay firm and secure with that noble and gracious lord as the soul with the body, Prakriti with Purusha and the light of dawn with the day. 
902 :'srrat'Tf^^ts^Tr i <=n *-l Li <*>1 cj <iS3ffh cb<rd h i m fqcr ^Tsat^l^'fyvi^ cFTT %oRhmf^^ §1% TfiMdH, iRmi Chaitra is a honey-sweet month. Vaishakha is a month of honey-sweets. These are the months of spring. Both these, born of agni, are closely connected to summer. May the earth and heaven be favourable to us for the gift of excellence, may the waters be favourable, may the herbs and trees be favourable, may all the orders of agni (heat and light each), committed to its own law and function, be favourable to us. May all the forms of vital fire in earth and heaven, integrated and mutually harmonious, supporting and energizing the two spring months like all the powers of nature serving and working for the omnipotent lord Indra, bless and vitalize us in all ways. 
903 :Just as the earth and heaven abide firm and secure with the Supreme Lord of the universe, just as the spring months abide by the vital fire of earth and heaven, so should we all abide firm and secure by the lord of the universe, nature and spring, as breath abides by life, as Prakriti abides by Purusha, and as part abides by the whole. 
904 :Ruling power, Shakti, you are tolerant, challenging and invincible. Challenge the mean, the ungenerous and the destructive forces. Face, fight and defeat those who are bent upon violence. You have the strength and prowess of a thousand powers. Be good to me, be good and gracious to all. 
905 :The winds blow cool and sweet as honey. The streams and ocean-currents flow cool and sweet as honey. May the herbs and trees be as sweet and pleasant as honey. (Let us too be good and sweet in our conduct as the winds, the streams and the herbs and trees, observing the law and ethics of value.) May the nights and the dawn be honey-sweet, soothing and inspiring. May the dust of mother-earth be sweet and fragrant. And may the light of the sun be honey-sweet and kind as father for us all. (Let us too follow the honey-sweets of nature in life.) May the herbs with their juices and the trees with their fruit be honey-sweet for us. May the sun be kind, sweet and invigorating. May the cows be sweet and rejuvenating as honey with their milk. May the saints, scholars, seniors and teachers be kind and affectionate as the sun, the mother earth and the mother cow. 
906 :Be in the centre of the waters deep as in the clouds so that the heat of the sun may not injure you nor the earthly heat, Vaishwanara, hurt you. Look round so that the people, free and fully protected from heat, are favourable to you. May the showers of celestial rain bless you. 
907 :The master controller of pranic energies of life, through karma, crosses the three oceans of time and space leading to the paradisal abode of the blessed in the sphere of the sun. Abiding with the Spirit of the universe he/she brightens up the earth and showers it with all the objects of sweetness and desire. 
908 :Man/Woman on earth, go thither to the region of the blessed where your noble ancestors have gone. (And that is the spring of the life of supernal joy.) May the great earth and high heaven bless and promote this yajna of our life. So may they and our parents join and bless our yajna of the household with their active blessings. 
909 :Behold the great acts of the omnipresent lord of the universe, Vishnu, acts like the creation, sustenance and dissolution of the world. Therein I see the essence, the ultimate blueprint of the discipline and actions for living. He is the great friend and lover of the human soul. He is the giver of bliss. 
910 :Mother of the universe, Prakriti, firm and inviolable power, bearer of the world’s forms in existence as you are, it was through your oceanic womb that Agni, the omniscient creative consciousness first manifested Itself. And He, knowing and manifesting through everything born, moved the materials of the cosmic yajna to the evolutionary powers of nature and communicated the cosmic knowledge through gayatri, trishtup and anushtup verses to the visionary sages. 
911 :(In the context of the home, grihastha, the wife is the Prakriti-like centre-hold of the organisation and the mother of the familial creation. The husband is agni, jataveda, father and yajamana of the home-yajna.) Master/Mistress of the home, you are the ruler, brilliant, self-enlightened and self-disciplined. Be steadfast, live well and abide in the home for the sake of food, energy, courage, wealth, honour and children. May the noble and gracious Brahmanas and the learned and eloquent scholars guide and protect you in your homely world. 
912 :Agni, lord of power and science, those horses of yours which are swift and accurate to carry you to the target of your ardour and ambition like an arrow and thunder bolt, are wonderful. Lord of speed, rise and yoke the horses to your chariot. 
913 :Agni, lord of light and power, veteran leader and generous man of yajna, rise and yoke to the chariot of your mission the horses/powers trained by the gods and, like a glorious ruler and expert master, take your seat Like streams, soft, sweet and ceaseless glides the flow of words distilled and purified by the heart and mind within. And I, wrapped in gold, in the midst of the light and fire of Agni, turned to a flute of reed, hear the murmur of the showers of benediction. 
914 :To you Agni, lord of knowledge and speech, thanks and salutations for the knowledge of truth, love and lustre of life, light of science, and brilliance of justice and rectitude! By virtue of you alone, this soul has become aware of the entire world and of the universal presence of agni, the vital energy of life and nature active in the earthly sphere. By virtue of Agni alone this scholar and teacher can propagate this knowledge of reality among the people around. 
915 :Agni, Lord of light and life, agni, man of science, is brilliant with the light of knowledge, illustrious with the lustre and splendour of power, golden lovable and blissful, and giver of a thousand gifts. We do homage to you for the innumerable gifts of prosperity, comfort and happiness. 
916 :With oblations of milk, honour the rising sun which holds in its womb and reveals innumerable forms and images of the world. With the heat, light and fragrance of the fire, ward off a host of ailments and grow. Growing in health and knowledge, help people to live a hundred years. Never never be proud. 
917 :Agni, universal power, man of knowledge and power, hurt not the velocity of the wind and the centre of the water and vapours. Hurt not anything that is creative and procurative in the midst of the world. Injure not the produce of rivers, the clouds and anything grown on the mountains. Kill not the birds and aquatic creatures. Kill not anything that saves from suffering and evil. 
918 :I worship Agni, eternal power, bright and fiery, lord of peace and bliss, and giver of health and vigour. 
919 :With all means and materials I study and develop the power of fire and electricity collected and developed by the ancients. I proceed season by season, planning and achieving stage by stage. 
920 :Agni, man of science and power, do not kill, destroy or injure the productive cow, the creative earth so bright and unviolated, and the restorative environment. 
921 :Agni, man of knowledge and power, do not injure, do not destroy, the protective power of the sun, the binding power of water, the lightning energy of the cloud born of regions beyond the sky, and the great, generous and regenerative earth, giver of a thousand blessings. 
922 :Agni, man of science and power, the vital fire and creative energy that was born of the flames of the cosmic yajna of Agni, Lord of life and light, illuminates the wide world and heaven, and with it Vishwakarma, the Lord Maker of all forms, makes the various forms of life in existence. May your passion for knowledge and power spare that creative energy from hurt and damage. 
923 :The Lord Supreme Creator is the wonderful life and splendour of the gods, universal powers of nature. He is the Eye, light and vitality, of the sun, the oceans of waters, and agni, the vital fire. He pervades and fills the heaven, the earth and the middle regions of the universe. He is the sole universal sun, the soul of the moving and the unmoving world and, like the sun, manifests Himself — ever risen, ever rising, never setting. 
924 :Imam ma himsirdvipadarh pasufn sahasrakso medhaya ciyamanah. Mayum pasum medha- magne jusasva tena cinvanastanvo nisida. Mayum te sugrcchatu yam dvismastam te sugrcchatu. 
925 :Agni/Ruler/Noble man or woman, growing and progressing in happiness, watchful with the vision of a thousand eyes, hurt not the humans, kill not the animals. Love and look after the wild as well as the domestic animals, both holy and serviceable. Working and progressing by that animal wealth, feel settled, be at peace with yourself. Let your concern address the wild animals, or let it be directed to those who hurt us. 
926 :Imam ma himsirekasapham pasum kanikradaih vajinam vajinesu. Gauramaranyamanu te disami tena cinvanastanvo nisida. Gauraih te sugrcchatu yam dvismastam te sugrcchatu. 
927 :Do not kill this one-hoofed animal, fastest among the fast, roaring in the battles. I advise you, turn your attention to the white, yellow and brown animals, the wild ones, and growing by this animal wealth, sit at peace with yourself. Let your concern address the wild animals. Let it be directed to those who hurt us. 
928 :Imam sahasram satadharamutsam vyacya- manaih sarirasya madhye. Ghrtam duhanam- aditiih janayagne ma hiihsih parame vyoman. Gavayamdranyamanu te disami tena cinvana- stanvo nisida. Gavayam te sugrcchatu yam dvismastam te sugrcchatu. 
929 :best of places, do not kill the cow and the bull, infinitely useful, and spring of a hundred streams and showers of milk and ghee for the people. It is holy and worthy of protection and development. I advise you, turn your attention to the wild cow and the bull and other animals. Growing and developing the economy with animal and forest wealth, feel settled with yourself and your land. Let your attention be directed to the wild cow and the forest wealth. Let your concern take on those who hurt us. 
930 :Imamurnayum varunasya nabhirh tvacam pasunam dvipadam catuspadam. Tvastuh prajanarh prathamarh janitramagne ma himsih parame vyoman. Ustramaranyamanu te disami tena cinvanastanvo nislda. Ustrain te sugrcchatu yam dvismastam te sugrcchatu. 
931 :Agni, noble ruler, in the wonderful world of the Supreme Lord, do not hurt, do not kill the sheep and other such animals, one of the first creations of Twashta, the maker of the world, and source of comfort and providers of woollen cover to the human beings and the animals. I point out to the wild camel and other wild animals. Growing and developing the economy with that animal wealth, be at peace with yourself in your land. Let your concern turn to the camel. Let it be directed to those who hurt us. 
932 :Ajo hyagnerajanista sokat so ’apasyajjanitara- magre. Tena deva devatamagramayahstena rohamdyannupa medhyasah. Sarabhamaranya- manu te disami tena cinvanastanvo nisida. Sarabham te sugrcchatu yam dvismastam te sugrcchatu. 
933 :The unborn individual soul was bom in this world from the flame of the Supreme Lord’s cosmic yajna of creation. It grew conscious and had a vision of the creator right there. By virtue of the vision and grace of the Lord, the pious souls, purified by the vision, realise the divine powers and rise to the heights of existence. Agni, noble ruler/noble man, I point out to the wild sharabha (fabulous antelope of the snowy forest, mightier than the lion and the elephant). Like that, defend yourself and grow, and growing thereby, be happy and feel satisfied and settled by yourself. Let your concern address the sharabha. Let your concern be directed to those who hurt us. 
934 :character, listen to the voice of Divinity. Protect and promote the people who give with faith and generosity. With your very heart and soul, protect and promote the child — human, animal and all. 
935 :For the protection of life and the production and management of energy, I place/initiate you: in the currents of energy in the sky, and the orbits of the stars and planets; in the source and centre of pranic energy, and concentrations of air in space; in the secret motions of the mind, and the depths of the sea; in the power and source of speech, and storms of heaving oceans in space; in the faculty of hearing and the transmission of sound; in the science of radiation and the solar region, the source of energy; in the original sources of energy, the universal ocean of motion of the Rajas mode of Nature (Prakriti); in the sands of earth and rivers and the waste materials; I initiate you with the visions of nature and spirit contained in the gayatri verses, I initiate you with the pure knowledge contained in the trishtup verses, I initiate you with the knowledge contained in the inspiring jagati verses, I initiate you with the knowledge contained in the clear exhilarating pankti verses of the Veda. 
936 :Ayam puro bhuvastasya prano bhauvayano vasantah pranayano gayatri vasantl gayatryai gay at ram gayatradupamsurupamsostrivrt trivrto rathantaram vasistha’ rsih prajapati- grhltaya tvaya pranam grhnami prajabhyah. 
937 :This Agni, universal spirit, is the first and foremost in existence, the eastern horizon of the world. Its offspring is prana, vital energy, life-breath of existence. The offspring of prana is spring. The song of spring is gayatri, joy. Joy is the music of spring from gayatri, the gayatra saman, soft, sweet and low. From gayatra, the upanshu, the receiver of soma, ladle for libation. And from the upanshu, creation of trivrit, the person dedicated to trivrit, threefold integrated Dharma of knowledge, action and prayer. From trivrit, the successful man, sociable, visionary and saviour. 
938 :Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by Prajapati, lord of creation, along with you I receive the vital energy of prana for the sake of children and family. 
939 :On the right (south) is the spirit and power of the divine, Vishwakarma, like vayu, wind and electric energy, the divine agency by which is accomplished every action and movement of the world. The offspring of Vishwakarma is the mind, desire and action. The offspring of mind is summer. Trishtup meter is the expression of summer. From trishtup is bom swara-sama of heat and lustre as the mid-day. From swara comes the antaryama, the silent libation of soma with self- control. From antaryama comes/is born the fifteen-phase stoma (pancha-dasha-stoma), expression of joy and hilarity. From pancha-dasha stoma comes Brihat-saman, the great saman song of jubilation and celebration. The seer expert of Brihat-saman is Bharadwaja, man of full knowledge and prosperity. 
940 :Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by Prajapati, alongwith you I receive mana, mind, that is, love and desire for the sake of family and community. 
941 :In the west (on the back) this sun is the divine power that illuminates and covers the whole world with light. The offspring of the sun is the light and the vision of the eye. The product of light and heat is the rain. The joy of rain is expressed in the jagati verse. In jagati metre are composed the Rik-samans. From the joy of Rik- Samans is bom ‘shukra’, the lustre and vitality of life. From shukra is born the sapta-dasha (seventeen) stoma and the seventeen faculty subtle body. From this seventeen-element living life is bom the diversity of living forms, of which the seer and visionary expert is jamadagni, man of light and lustre. 
942 :Woman of knowledge, virtue and love blest by Prajapati, along with you I receive light and vision for family and the people. 
943 :On the north is this spirit of bliss and joy. The instrument of joy is the ear, and sharad, autumn, is the season for ear and music. The metre for sharad is anushtup. In anushtup is composed the aida-saman which is the song of beauty and sweetness. From aida is the ‘manthi’, churner, who churns out hilarity and virility. From manthis comes the twenty-one part stoma which constitutes an integrated programme of twenty one branches of learning. From twenty one stoma comes vairaja saman, a body of knowledge, of which the seer- master is Vishwamitra, friend of the whole world. 
944 :Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by Prajapati, alongwith you I receive the ear and the voice that gives me the songs of joy and virility for the sake of the family and the community. 
945 :Up above is this intelligence. From intelligence and for it is speech. With speech goes the season of ‘hemanta’, winter, and pankti is the metre for hemanta. Nidhanavat, the choric finale of a saman about hemanta, winter-song, is composed in pankti metre. From nidhanavat, the finale, is born the agrayana, first soma libation in agnishtoma yajna for the attainment of plenty of wealth and knowledge. From agrayana, there are twelve and thirty three saman hymns of praise. From these twelve and thirty three, we have shakvara and rewata, means to wealth, honour and power. The person who is an expert visionary of these hymns is a master of all arts and actions leading to wealth, power and honour. 
946 :Woman of knowledge, virtue and love, blest by Prajapati, alongwith you I receive the gift of speech (knowledge, wisdom and expertise) for the sake of children, family and the community. 
947 :Lady of the house, your family and community is settled and strong. Your home is settled and secure. You yourself are firm and inviolable. Settle in peace and security firmly in your home, observing the duties of the household and tasting the first flavours of the heart. May the Ashwins (guides of the day) and the adhvaryus (guides of the familial yajna), teachers and advisors see you firmly settled. 
948 :Gentle lady, sweet and decent, blest with a noble family, abundance of milk and honey, and the wealth of a generous mind, take your abode in a beautiful comfortable home on the earth. May the scholars and men of justice and generosity appreciate and praise you without reservation. Be generous and kind to these people of knowledge and wisdom for the sake of conjugal bliss and prosperity. May the Ashwinis (guiding stars of the day) and adhvaryus (guides of the home yajna) bless you with a happy and prosperous home and family life. 
949 :Noble woman, like a master controller of his personal powers and expertise and guardian of his people, settle here in this noble family for the great joys and battles of life. As a father protects and promotes his child, so, happy with your self and serving your family, live and advance in your life’s mission. 
950 :Master controller and promoter of faculties of intelligence, settle here with all your virtues and expertise for the peace and joy of the noble people. Noble woman, come like a father to the child and live in peace and comfort, comely and graceful, happy with yourself and serving the family. 
951 :Noble lady of the house, you are the protector of the earth (fulfilment of this earthly home). You are sweet and liquid as the waters of life. May all the noble and enlightened people appraise, approve and honour you whole heartedly. Blest with plenty and prosperity of means and materials, keen lover of ritual hymns and yajna sessions, take your rightful place here. Blest with progeny, wealth and honour, win for us the best of life and joy. May the saints and sages of light and the guides of yajna consecrate you here in this home. 
952 :On the floor of this earth (in this home) I seat and consecrate you, lady of the inner world of the heart, firm support of the home-life in all directions, mistress and presiding presence of all the residences. You are the ripples of joy on the streams of life. Indeed you are conceived and created by Vishwakarma, the cosmic artist. May the Ashwinis, torch bearers of life, and the adhvaryus, experts of yajnic life, guide and sanctify you here. 
953 :Jyeshtha and Ashadha are the two months of summer. Two-month summer, you are a temporal offspring of the internal (essential) power of agni, universal fire. May all the modes of agni, each with its natural power, be favourable to me toward honour and excellence. May the earth and heaven be favourable and make it (honour and excellence) possible. May the waters be favourable. May the herbs and trees make it possible. May all the forms of agni, heat, light, electricity, etc., working in earth and the heaven toward one end and maturing the summer season, be firm and steady in nature. Just as all the devas, powers of nature, subserve Indra, the essential and central energy of nature and life, so should the two months of summer faithfully and inviolably serve the power of agni as part subserves the whole. 
954 :Noble man, gentle lady, be in tune with the seasons and the waters, receiving the blessings of nature and breathing the generous vitalities of pranic energy. May the leading lights of life and the guides of the yajna of home life establish you in this home and consecrate you to Agni, the Spirit of life pervasive in and on the earth. 
955 :Noble man, gentle lady, love the seasons, love the waters of the earth and sky, love all the eight Vasus (supports of life), and love all the heavenly gifts of life’s vitality. May the path-makers of life and the geniuses of the advancement of humanity establish you in this home for the service of Agni, Lord of life who blesses all his creatures with all they need for total fulfilment. 
956 :Noble man, gentle lady, favourite of the seasons, blest with the vitalities of mind and energy, favoured by all the eleven Rudra supports of life-breath, and supported by all the enlightened people of divine knowledge, may the torch-bearers of the day and the experts of yajna establish and bless you here in this home in the service of Agni, lord of light and knowledge, for the happiness and prosperity of humanity. 
957 :Noble man, gentle lady, friend of the seasons, master of mind and intellect, favourite of the sun round the year, friend and associate of the scholars and teachers of science, may the leading lights of the day and the specialists of the constructive projects consecrate you here in this life in the service of Agni, Lord of light and prosperity, for the enlightenment and advancement of society. 
958 :Noble man of knowledge and education, generous lady of enlightenment, be friends with the seasons, support the creative and constructive programmes, join all the brilliant and generous leaders, cooperate with the powers that promote life and happiness. May the leading lights of knowledge and progress and the leaders of social yajna consecrate you in this home and dedicate you to Agni, Lord of life and light, for the well-being of all the earth’s children and the environment. 
959 :Pranam me pahyapanam me pahi vydnarh me pahi caksurma ’ urvyd vibhahi srotram me slokaya. Apah pinvausadhlrjinva dvipadava catuspat pahi divo Vrstimeraya. 
960 :With the earth and the environment, protect and strengthen my pranic energy, protect and strengthen the apana air going down and out, protect and strengthen my vyana air circulating in the body-system. Give the divine light to my eye, the divine voice to my ear. Protect and promote the waters. Refresh and promote the greenery. Protect the bipeds (humans and birds). Protect the four-footed (animals). Bring the showers of rain from heaven. 
961 :Like Prajapati, protector and sustainer of His children, try to attain the holiest qualities of knowledge, Dharma and peace of mind. 
962 :Get to the Kshatriya class of regal virtues, justice, honour, magnanimity and courtesy. 
963 :Like the guardian and supporter of the people, cultivate the economic values of freedom, justice, liberality and humility. 
964 :Like Vishwakarma, maker of the world and lord of His creatures, try to be free and win the love of the people. 
965 :Like a master of social and political activities, try to be a strong and independent expert of all sociopolitical developments. 
966 :Like a mighty generous leader, be an independent harbinger of freedom, joy and prosperity. 
967 :Like a great man of action and endeavour, take initiative in lovable action, family bonding and strong individuality. 
968 :Like a tiger among men, be a man of invincible force and inviolable protection. 
969 :Like a carrier of historic burdens, be a man of strength, greatness and endurance. 
970 :Like the cloud laden with vapours, be strong and generous, go round in all the quarters and bring showers of joy. 
971 :Like a flood of life-giving waters, come with a living message of freedom, holiness, fertility and growth. 
972 :Like the bull, be a man of strength, open, free and productive. 
973 :Like the cow, be generous and create joy and fulfilment all-round. 
974 :Like the trinity of life-support and the cow, sheep and goat, be generous, a man of knowledge, action and worship, and be blest with progeny. 
975 :Like the carrier of harvested grain, be a man of plenty and joy unbounded. 
976 :ecstatic songs of yajna and have the joy of scientific knowledge. 
977 :Like a holy man of knowledge, action and worship, find the blessings of strength with freedom from suffering. 
978 :Like a visionary of the four Vedas and master of the four states of consciousness, be blest with knowledge, worship and divine communion. 
979 :May Indra and Agni (the sun and universal electric energy), both of you, firm up the unshaken foundation of the yajna of earthly life. And may the heaven and the earth between themselves bind and hold the middle regions of the sky. 
980 :(The husband and wife both should strengthen the foundations of home-life-yajna beyond disturbance and, with their intelligence and character, bind their love and yajnic life in stability.) May Vishwakarma, lord maker of the world/your husband, seat you firmly on top of the sky. Do not pollute, do not injure, the sky. Growing expansive, encompassing, enrich the sky, strengthen the sky for the sake of prana, apana, vyana and udana energy, and for honour and strength of character. 
981 :May Vayu, wind and universal energy/your husband, protect and promote you in all ways with great good fortune, light, peace and well-being. Stay firm with that divine power like the breath of life. 
982 :You are the mistress of the rising light of the east. You are the lady of universal light of the south direction. You are the noble and peaceful power of light in the west. You are the self-refulgent light of the north. You are the great lady of the top and foundation of the homeland, the great sustaining mother earth of the family. 
983 :Lady of light (mistress of the house), may Vishwakarma, lord of noble actions/your husband consecrate you on top of the sky for the sake of total prana, apana and vyana energy (of family life). Receive universal light and radiate the light of joy and peace. Vayu/your husband, is your lord sustainer. Stay firm with that divine power, dear as the breath of life, and be steadfast as the light of the sun. 
984 :months of the rainy season, you are touched at heart by the passion of Agni. May heaven and earth be favourable to us for the gift of excellence, may the waters be favourable, may the herbs and trees be favourable, may all the orders of agni (heat and light), each committed to its own law and function, be favourable to us. May all the vital fires in earth and heaven, integrated and harmonious, supporting and energizing the months of rains, like the power of nature serving the omnipotent lord, Indra, bless and vitalize us in all ways. 
985 :Just as earth and heaven abide by God, as rains abide by vital fire, so should we abide by the Lord, nature, and the rains like life and breath, Prakriti and Purusha, and part and the whole. 
986 :The lovely Ashwin and vigorous Kartika are months of the autumn season. You have the warmth of agni at heart. May the earth and heaven, the waters, the herbs and trees, and all the orders of agni (heat and light), each according to its own law and function, be favourable to us for the gift of excellence. May all the vital fires in earth and heaven, integrated and harmonious, energizing the months of autumn like powers of nature serving the Lord, Indra, bless and vitalize us in all ways. 
987 :Just as heaven and earth abide by God, as autumn abides by agni, so should we abide by the Lord, nature and autumn like life with breath, Prakriti with Purusha and part with the whole. 
988 :Ayurme pahi pranam me pahyapanam me pahi vyanam me pahi caksurme pahi srotram me pahi vacam me pinva mano me jinva tmanam me pahi jyotirme yaccha. 
989 :Light and Law of the Universe, protect my life. Energize my breath. Clear and strengthen my cleansing system and eliminate the wastes. Strengthen the circulation of energy in my body. Protect and sharpen my eye. Protect and sensitize my ear. Guard and enliven my speech. Regenerate and broaden my mind. Save and strengthen my soul. Give me light, give me the light to see and realize. 
990 :Ma chandah prama chandah pratima chando ’ as rlv ay as chandah pahktischanda ’usnik chando brhati chando ’nustup chando virat chando gayatri chandas tristup chando jagatl chandah. 
991 :Measure is the secret of happiness. Reason is the measure of intelligence. Freedom is the condition of truth incarnate. Practical science is the means of strength, prosperity and brightness. Five-fold yoga is the giver of light. Nature is the sustenance of life. Attachment to pleasure is bhoga (sufferance). The light of knowledge is science. The protector of gayatri is its realization. The well-being of body, mind and soul is happiness. The dynamics of existence lies in omnipotence. 
992 :Earth is the seat of freedom. Sky is the symbol of joy. Light is knowledge and science. Year is the understanding and measure of time. Stars are free in their orbits. Speech is the medium of truth. Mind is the seat of honesty. Farming is the source of production. Gold leads to pleasure. Cow is the mother of joy and plenty. Goat gives joy. Horse loves freedom. Know this and follow. 
993 :Agnirdevata vato devata suryo devata candrama devata vasavo devta rudra devata ’’ditya devata maruto devata visve deva devata brhaspatir- devatendro devata Varuno devata. 
994 :Agni (fire) is a divine power and value. It is a god. Vayu (air) is god. Sun is god. Moon is god. Vasus (sustainers of life) are divine. Rudras (powers of law and justice) are divine. The winds are divine. Vishwedevas, the great, brilliant and generous powers of the world, are divine. Lord of the great universe is God. Indra (universal energy) is divine. Varuna (universal waters) are divine. 
995 :Know the divine powers and inculcate their qualities in your character and conduct. 
996 :Noble woman of knowledge and virtue, you are brilliant on top and firm, the support, sustenance and foundation of life like the earth. I accept and honour you for the sake of life and health, light and lustre, food Gentle lady, faultlessly disciplineOd and brilliant, going by rule and leading others to rule, you are firm and sustaining like the earth. I accept and honour you for food and energy and for wealth and nourishment. 
997 :In the year round of yajna there is the spontaneous hymn (song) of the threefold stoma sacred for the purity of body, mind and speech. There is the fifteen part song of light and the moon, the seventeen part song for the sky and the year. There is the twenty-one part stoma for stability, eighteen part song of fast motion, nineteen part song of austerity and discipline, twenty part song of open conduct, twentytwo part song of brilliance, twentythree part song of sustenance, twentyfour part song of union and discussion, twentyfive part song of procreation, twentyseven part song of prowess and lustre, thirtyone part song of karma and intelligence, thirtythree part song of stability, thirtyfour part song of the height of heaven and divinity, thirtysix part song of paradisal bliss, fortyeight part song of the modes of existence, and four stage song of celebration in chatushtoma yajna in the year. 
998 :You are a part of Agni, lord giver of life and protection, wholly under the direction and control of your dedication to the lord. With the observance of Trivrit (three part) stoma, you inculcate, protect and You are a part of Indra, lord of energy and power, wholly under the direction and control of Vishnu, the omnipresent lord of the world. With the observance of Panchadasha (fifteen part) stoma, you inculcate, protect and promote the power and prowess (Kshatriya character) of the community. 
999 :You are a part of the intelligent and wide-awake observers of the people, totally under the direction and control of the lord and ruler of humanity. With the observance of Saptadasha (seventeen part) stoma, you inculcate, protect and promote the economic power of the people. 
1000 :You are a part of Mitra, sun and universal energy, totally under the direction and control of Varuna, the universal water power. With the observance of Ekavinsha (twenty-one part) stoma, you attract and promote the wind and rain from the region of the sun. 
1001 :You are a part of the Vasus, eight sustaining abodes of life, under care and control of the Rudras, protectors of life. With the observance of Chaturvinsha (twenty four part) stoma you love and protect the animal wealth of the world. 
1002 :You are a part of the Adityas, the suns and stars of the universe, under care and favour of the Maruts, powers of wind and sky. With the observance of Panchavinsha (twenty five part) stoma, you protect and promote the maternal power of women. 
1003 :You are a part of Aditi, earth and sky, under control and favour of the powers of health and nutrition in nature. With the observance of Trinava (twenty seven part) stoma you protect and advance the lustre and glory of the people. 
1004 :You are a part of Savita, Lord creator and sustainer of life, under care and control of Brihaspati, lord and master of the wide world. With the observance of Chatushtoma yajna you protect, develop and safeguard all the directions of space. 
1005 :You are a part and master of mixed materials with full power over the separate materials for consumption in the cold season. With observance of the chatushchatwarinsha (fortyfour part) stoma you protect and promote all the species of life. 
1006 :You are a part of the intelligent and wise experts of art and technology with full power and love over all the brilliant and generous nobles of the world. With observance of the Trayastrinsha (thirtythree part) stoma, protect and promote all the living beings. 
1007 :The stimulating Margashirsha and invigorating Pausha are the months of Hemanta (winter). 
1008 :You are the innermost love and power of Agni, universal fire of life. May the heaven and earth be favourable, may the waters invigorate, may the herbs rejuvenate, and may all the modes of vital fire, each true to its nature and function, strengthen us for honour and excellence. Just as the powers of nature join to serve Indra, universal divine energy, so may all the orders of agni in heaven and earth, integrated and cooperative, strengthening the winter months, join to bless us in the search and endeavour for excellence. 
1009 :May the winter months of nature and humanity stay firm with that universal power of Agni like the breath of life with Spirit. 
1010 :The Lord of the universe, creator and protector of His children is Ishwara. Worship Him with one, sincere voice of the heart and soul. He created and revealed the universal knowledge of the Vedas for His children, and He is the Lord and protector of that knowledge too. Worship Him with three, reason, will and emotion. He created the five elements of nature. He is the Lord and protector of these elements. Worship Him with five, body, mind, intellect, memory and consciousness. Saptarshis (five currents of primary pranic energy, mahat tattva, i.e., creative nature, and ahankara, self-consciousness) were created by Him. He is the ruler and sustainer of the seven. Worship Him with seven, five currents of secondary pranas (energy) and your will and endeavour. 
1011 :Worship Him with nine faculties of prana and mind who created the paternal and protective forces of nature and the earth which is the supreme mother of His children. 
1012 :Worship with eleven faculties (ten pranic energies and the soul) Him who created the seasons with their characteristic ruling properties. 
1013 :Worship with thirteen faculties (ten pranas, two commitments-one for values and one against disvalues — and the soul) Him who created the twelve months with their presiding year. 
1014 :Worship with fifteen faculties (five pranas, five senses, two commitments one soul, mind and reason/ intellect) Him who created the socio-political order of governance with Indra, the supreme ruler of the order. 
1015 :Worship with seventeen faculties (five pranas, five senses, two commitments, one soul, mind, reason/ intellect, hands and feet) Him who created the domestic animals and the economic order with Brihaspati as the head of the economic (Vaishya) class. 
1016 :With nineteen (ten pranas, five elements, mind, reason/intellect, memory and self-consciousness), worship Him who created the educated and the uneducated all, with the day-and-night cycle of time for work and rest as the power of control over work and rest. 
1017 :With twenty one (functions and faculties of the human body, mind and soul), worship Him who created the undivided hoofed animals with Varuna, water and the night, being the presiding power for the animals. 
1018 :With twenty three (parts of animals’ bodies), worship Him who created the little animals and insects with the natural sources of nutriment as the presiding power. 
1019 :With twenty five (parts of small animals’ bodies) worship Him who created the wild animals of the forest with wind and speed as the presiding power. 
1020 :With twenty-seven (qualities of the wild animals), worship Him who created the heaven and the earth which are universal, and who also created the eight Vasus, eleven Rudras and the twelve Adityas existent within the heaven and earth and presiding over the life and nature in heaven and earth. 
1021 :With twenty nine properties of the herbs and trees, worship Him who created the herbs and trees with Soma as their chief and presiding power. 
1022 :With thirtyone parts and properties of the created world of nature, worship Him who created the elemental and the compound materials of nature and life with these very elements and forms being the presiding presences of existence. 
1023 :With thirty three properties of the elements of nature, worship Him in whose creation Prajapati, the father of His creatures, is the Supreme Lord, and into whom all the forms and elements of existence recede in peace and silence for the night of annihilation. 
1024 :Agni, Lord omniscient and protector of life and society, throw out the adversaries arisen against our life. Keep off the negative forces not yet arisen but impending against us all. Kind at heart and favourable, speak to us from above and grant our prayer so that, secure from triple suffering, happy and advancing under your care and love, all may live in a home of triple bliss. 
1025 :Agni, Lord omniscient of the life of existence, throw off the enemies of humanity come up with force. Counter the negative forces lying and waiting in ambush, not coming up openly. Kind at heart and generous of thought for us, speak to us from above so that we may be able every way to repulse the open as well as the covert enemies of life and humanity. 
1026 :Gentle lord of the home, and charming lady of the house far from greed and grabbing, generously cooperative with the rejuvenating forces of nature, you are dedicated and loyal servants of Agni. May all the generous saints and scholars appreciate and praise you for your noble work. Dedicated to hymns of divinity and yajna, generous in prosperity and charity, settle in this sweet home. Give us the wealth of life and the gift of a blessed family. 
1027 :Movement is life. Knowledge is thrill. Excellence is great, truth is excellence. Peace is great. Self mastery is sovereignty. Industry is prosperity. Protection against evil is security. Mind and thought is light. Generosity is exhilarating. Fluidity is majesty. Magnanimity, liquidity and transparency is gentleness. Universal reputation is honour. Divine knowledge, noble performance and honest prayer is glory. Poetry is ecstasy. Straight behaviour like liquid movement is satisfaction. The path to eternity is bliss. The way of the world is joy. The directions of space are exciting. The razor’s edge is the challenge of life. The splendour of existence is rapture. 
1028 :Prevention of evil is light. Fight against evil is courage. Self-control is bravery. Variety of choice is versatility. Ascendancy to the heavens is freedom. The path to success is the right choice. The windfalls of attainment are lovely. Meditation on the sky reveals the bonds of piety. Voice is revelation. Light is illumination. Speech is expression of word, meaning and reality. Thought is reflection on meaning and reality. Effort and achievement on earth is meaningful. Excellence is valuable. Life is a boon. The life-force is irresistible. Emulation and competition is legitimate. Great action is glory. Cover and protection is nobility. Rising against difficulty is perseverance. Freedom is the breath of life. Faith and ascertainment is inviolable joy. 
1029 :Love truth for the sake of truth with the light of truth in action. 
1030 :Protect Dharma for the promotion of Dharma with the observance of Dharma in practice. 
1031 :With research and advancement into knowledge of the nature of light, advance the knowledge of the regions of the sun. 
1032 :With research into the sky as the conjunction of earth and heaven, advance the knowledge of the sky for the sustenance of life. 
1033 :With knowledge of the earth and its relation with life, advance the knowledge of earth science for life. 
1034 :With the knowledge of rain and the sustenance of life by rain, advance the knowledge of water, evaporation and rain and promote rain for the sake of life. 
1035 :With the knowledge of the light of the day, know the light and day and advance the knowledge of cosmography. 
1036 :With the knowledge of night following the day, advance the knowledge of the day and night cycle. 
1037 :With the desire for the beauty of living, advance the knowledge of the Vasus (abodes of the sustenance of life) for the sake of the Vasus and better sustenance. 
1038 :With the knowledge of the planets and the sun in their respective orbits in the galaxy, advance the knowledge of the sun and stars in relation to planets and life. 
1039 :By health, wealth and prosperity, increase health, wealth and prosperity in an ascending order. 
1040 :By a continuous process promote communication and knowledge for the development of communication, information and vaidic knowledge. 
1041 :By the development of food, herbs and trees, develop the science of medicine. 
1042 :By the observance of good conduct and Dharma, develop smart bodies and by smart bodies develop strong bodies and better health. 
1043 :By health and vigour and by life-sustaining reading, promote life-sustaining knowledge and education. 
1044 :By victorious prowess and lustre, advance and promote life-protecting courage, prowess and lustrous dignity. 
1045 :You are the first find on the homeward journey. I love and accept you for constant companionship at every step. You are the support and confirmation of every step I take. I honour you for support and self-assurance. You are the real wealth of life, I love you as the prize of earthly existence. You are the light and lustre of life. I honour and prize you for light and glory. 
1046 :You know the threefold world of matter (tamas), motion (rajas) and mind (sattva). I love and respect you for the threefold world of nature. You are the power of initiative. I follow you for the sake of initiative. You are the versatile man of all-round action. I accept you for the variety of action. You are the man of constant Dharma. I dedicate myself to you for the observance of Dharma. You are the great leap forward in life. I follow you for the great leap forward. You are the man of balanced and comprehensive progress. I dedicate myself to you for balanced and comprehensive progress. You are the man of onward advance. I follow you for the advance upward. You are for change and ascendance in life. I admire and follow you for growth in the higher direction. 
1047 :Lady of the house, dedicate yourself to the head of the family and with vigour and enthusiasm, advance the power and excellence of the family. 
1048 :Rajnyasi pracl digvasavaste deva ’adhipatayo gnirhetinam pratidharta trivrttva stomah prth i vya m s ray a tv ajyam ukthamavy at hay a i stabhnatu rathantaram sama pratisthitya’ antariksa’ rsayastva prathamajd devesu divo matrayd varimna prathantu vidharta cayam- adhipatisca te tva sarve samvidana nakasya prsthe svarge loke yajamanam ca sadayantu. 
1049 :You are the queen refulgent like the East direction. All the Vasu havens of life are your divine protectors. Agni, Lord of flames and wielder of the thunderbolt, wards off your adversities. May the Trivrit stoma hymns settle you on the earth. May the yajna libations of ghee and Uktha hymns firmly stabilise you against disturbance. May the Rathantara Sama hymns expand your honour to the skies. May the foremost Rishis, saints and scholars spread your honour and reputation with the measure of your heavenly excellence among the May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of the world and all those powers who know, together in unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights of the heavenly regions of bliss. 
1050 :Viradasi daksina dig rudraste dev a ’ adhip at ay a ’ indro hetlnam pratidharta pahcadasastva stomah prthivyam srayatu pra’ugamuktham- avyathayai stabhnatu brhatsama pratisthitya’ antariksa’rsayastva prathamaja devesu divo matraya varimna prathantu vidharta cayam- adhipatisca te tvd sarve samvidana nakasya prsthe svarge loke yajamanam ca sadayantu. 
1051 :You are the reigning lady of light like the South direction. All the Rudra powers of love and justice are your divine protectors. Indra, lord of power and the thunderbolt, keeps off your adversaries. May the Panchadasha (fifteen part) stoma of Rks settle you on the earth. May the Pre-uga Uktha hymns firmly secure you against fear and disturbance. May the Brihat-Sama hymns and karma extend your honour to the skies. May the foremost Rshis, saints and scholars spread your honour and fame with the measure of your heavenly excellence among the noblest people. 
1052 :May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of the world and all those powers who know, together in unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights of the heavenly regions of bliss. 
1053 :Samradasi prafici dig adityaste deva ’adhipatayo varuno hetinam pratidharta saptadasastvd stomah prthivyam srayatu marutvatiyam- ukdiamavyathayai stabhnatu vairupam sama pratisthitya’ antariksa’ rsayastva prathamaja devesu divo matraya varimna prathantu vidharta cayamadhipatisca te tvd sarve sarhvidana nakasya prsthe savarge loke yajamanam ca sddayantu. 
1054 :You are the lady of brilliance and bliss like the soothing light of the Western direction. All the twelve Adityas, stars of light and powers of energy, are your divine protectors. Varuna, Lord of waters and controller of evil, wards off your suffering. May the Saptadasha (seventeen part) stoma settle you on the earth. May the Marutvatiya Uktha and the libations firmly stabilize you against doubt and disturbance. May the Vairupa Sama hymns extend your honour to the skies. May the foremost Rshis, saints and scholars spread your honour and fame with the measure of your heavenly excellence May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of the world and all those powers that know, together in unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights of the heavenly regions of bliss. 
1055 :You are self-refulgent like the light of the North. The Maruts, powers of wind and storm, are your divine protectors. Soma, moon, lord of peace and beauty, is your saviour against violence and evil. May the Ekavinsha (twentyone part) stoma settle you on the earth. May the Nishkevalya Uktha firmly stabilize you in love and faith against disturbance. May the Vairaja Sama hymns and related Karma carry your honour and fame to the skies. May the foremost Rishis, saints and sages spread your honour and reputation with the measure of your heavenly excellence among the noblest people. 
1056 :May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of the world and all those powers that know, together in unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights of the heavenly regions of bliss. 
1057 :Adhipatnyasi brhati dig visve te deva ’adhipatayo brhaspatirhetinam pratidhartta trinavatraya- strimsau tva stomau prthivyam srayatam vaisvadevagnimarute ’ukthe ’ avyathayai stabhnltam sakvararaivate samariipratisthitya ’ antariksa’rsayastva pratliamajd devesu divo matraya varimna prathantu vidhartta cayamadhipatisca te tva sarve samvidana nakasya prsthe svarge loke yajamanam ca sddayantu. 
1058 :You are the supreme mistress of the home like great directions in the upper spaces. All the divine powers and nobilities are your protectors. Brihaspati, lord of the wide world, is your guardian against all pain and suffering. May the Trinava (twentyseven part) and Trayastrinsha (thirtythree part) stoma hymns settle you on the earth. May the Vaishvadevagni and Maruta Uktha hymns firmly stabilize you against doubt and disturbance. May the Shakvara and Raivata Sama hymns extend your honour and fame to the skies. May the foremost Rishis, saints and sages spread your honour and reputation with the measure of your heavenly excellence among the noblest people. 
1059 :May this lord of yours and the Lord sustainer of the world and all those powers that know well, together in unison, establish you and the yajamana on the heights of the heavenly regions of bliss. 
1060 :Ayatn puro harikesah suryarasmistasya ratlia- grtsasca rathaujasca senanigramanyau. Puhjikasthala ca kratusthala capsarasau. Dahksnavah pasavo hetih pauruseyo vadhah prahetistebhyo namo astu te no’ vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 
1061 :Yonder front in the east rises the sun like a king investing everything with green by its rays. Like the king’s commander of his forces and the chief of his city, are the two months of spring, Chaitra and Baisakha, months of enlightened joy and joyful glory. The rays of the sun collectively for all and separately for specific ritual are currents of energy for life on the earth. 
1062 :weapons of wild nature against which human weapons of defence ought to be made and used. 
1063 :May the rays of the sun in spring and the powers of defence save us. May they be good and efficacious to us. Thanks and salutations to them. All those cruel forces which violate our life and all such forces which we oppose, all these we deliver unto the judgement of the powers and the spirit of nature. 
1064 :Ay am daksina visvakarma tasya rathasvanasca rathecitrasca senanigramanyau. Menakd ca sahajanya cdpsarasau yatudhana heti raksamsi prahetistebhyo namo’astu te no’vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 
1065 :On the right from the south rides in his chariot this Summer Wind, Vishwakarma, versatile power for all activities. Like the king’s commander of the forces and the chief of his city, with the roar of the chariot wheels and the variegated colour of his banner, are the summer months of Jyeshtha and Ashadha. The special guests of the wind and the general currents of it are double waves of energy for life on the earth. 
1066 :Mordacious forces are the danger to life. Watchful defence is the counteraction. Thanks and salutations to the powers of defence. May they be kind and efficacious to us. All those that violate our life and all those we oppose, we deliver unto the judgement of the powers of defence and the Spirit of nature. 
1067 :Ayatn pascad visvavyacastasya rathaprotasca- samarathasca senariigramanyau. Pramlocanti canumlocantl capsarasau vyaghrci hetih sarpah prahetistebhyo namo’astu te no’vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti tamesam jamblie dadhmah. 
1068 :At the back in the West is this rain power of Agni, universal electric energy. Like a king’s commander of the forces and the chief of his city, are the two months of rain, Shravana and Bhadrapada, with the charming beauty of the clouds and the awful majesty of lightning. The power to nourish the vegetation and the ripening touch to the crops are the two currents of its energy. 
1069 :Mordacious animals such as the tiger are dangerous. Creatures such as the snake are still more dangerous. Against them the thunderbolt for defence and man-made plans. 
1070 :May the powers of safety and defence save us. May they be good and kind to us. All those that violate our life and all those we oppose, we deliver unto the judgement of the powers of defence and the spirit of nature. 
1071 :Ayamuttarat samyadvasustasya tarksyasca- ristanemisca senariigramanyau. Visvaci ca ghrtaci capsarasavapo hetirvatah praheti- stebhyo namo ’astu te no ’vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no devesti tamesaih jambhe dadhmah. 
1072 :On the North side is this season of autumn, generous associate of yajna. Like a king’s commander of his forces and the chief of his city, are the months of Ashwin and Kartik, one the sharpest stimulant of intelligence, the other an antidote to pain and disease. The peace that pervades everywhere in nature and the power that blesses all with cool and soothing waters, milk and butter are two modes of its power. 
1073 :Waters are the boon. Breezes are the greater boon. Thanks and salutations to the powers. May they save us. May they be kind and blissful to us. 
1074 :All those that violate our life and all those that we oppose, we deliver unto the judgement of the powers of defence and the spirit of nature. 
1075 :Ayamuparyarvagvasustasya senajicca susena- sca senanlgramanyau. Urvasi ca purva- cittiscapsarasavavasphurjan hetirvidyut prahetistebhyo namo’astu te no’vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti tames am jambhe dadhmah. 
1076 :This on top, after rains and autumn, is the winter season, treasure-giver of wealth. Like a king’s commander of the forces and the chief of his city, are the two months of Marga-Shirsha and Pausha, one like a lord of the hosts, the other victorious. The spirit of great love and freedom and the spirit of winsome beauty of the heart are two powers of the season. The roar of thunder is the weapon and lightning is another and greater one. 
1077 :Salutations to the winter months and their gifts and powers. May they save us. May they be good and auspicious. Whoever violates our life and whoever we oppose in defence, we deliver unto the judgement of the powers of defence and the spirit of nature. 
1078 :In winter, this Agni, shining supreme as the lord of space between the earth and heaven like the sun, rules and illuminates the directions and inspires the vitalities of life with new energy. 
1079 :This Agni, Lord of eternal vision, rules the world on top of everything. Possessed of infinite virtues, giver of countless joys, He is the lord of food, energy and the wealth of the world. 
1080 :Agni (heat and electricity), Atharva, scholar high- priest of scientific yajna of energy, churns you out of the sky on top of the world to bring down the energy to the earth. 
1081 :Agni, leading power of yajna, the earth and the sky, you raise your tongue of flames bearing the fragrance of yajna libations over there and, one with the blissful catalytic process of consumption and creation, you hold in heaven the top light of the world, the sun, which rains the showers of joy on the earth. 
1082 :The fire wakes up and rises by the samits (fuel) offered by the devotees, and, just as a restless calf runs to the mother cow coming in the twilight of the dawn (or evening), so do the flames eagerly rise to the heaven (emanating peace, prosperity and happiness). 
1083 :Just as the man established in the Word offers hymns of praise with libations to the holyfire, just as the light in the sun-rays does homage to the splendour of the all-illuminant sun in heaven, so do we offer words of praise in celebration to Agni, lord of light and vision, worthy of reverence and worship, lord of strength and power, who showers rains of bliss over the earth and her children. 
1084 :This agni here, first and foremost power of nature, lighted and established in the vedi by dedicated saints and sages, is worthiest of reverence and esteem. It is most valuable for development through creative and constructive acts of yajna. Present as it is, wonderful and universal, in the rays of the sun and currents of energy, the most intelligent and versatile men of genius develop it for the general good of the people. 
1085 :Agni (fire and electricity), pure and sacred, protector of the people, ever wakeful, versatile and generous, source and symbol of plenty and prosperity, came into existence for new and newer good and excellence of the people, and shines brilliant with heaven-touching grandeur. 
1086 :Agni, fire, universal light of life, saints and scholars search for you and discover your presence hidden in the heart, abiding in every current of energy. Such as you are, churned out of nature you rise, and they find you mighty, great and awful child of the Wind, dear as the very breath of life. 
1087 :Friends, offer properly and accurately the exact homage and libations to the darling of your people and settlements, Agni, generous giver, powerful protector and the dearest child of omnipotence. 
1088 :Agni, powerful lord of light and wealth, you join with all in love wholly and completely. You rise and shine in your rightful holy place on the earth. Generous lord, shower on us the wealth of the world from all sides. 
1089 :Agni, most wondrous lord of food and energy, dearest to all, blazing with light like the sun, people in all nations from all walks of life invoke you and offer libations for the attainment of food, energy and comfort in life. 
1090 :For your sake, I invoke, explore and worship (develop) with the offering of this holy food (investment) Agni, creative and illuminative power of the world, universal energy, inviolable, dear and generous, most perceptively responsive, relentlessly active, guardian power of non-violent constructive acts of love, and immortal lord of the dynamics of existence. 
1091 :I invoke the immortal Agni, universal power of light (in the form of the sun); I invoke the immortal Agni, universal power of fire (in the form of vitality); it joins with universal creative generosity for total nourishment, it unites with love overcoming all hate and anger, and, piously called upon, it responds and hastens to help and bless us. 
1092 :That Agni, faithfully invoked in yajna, immediately stirs and rises. That same Agni, called up with love and sacrifice, responds spontaneously, it comes and blesses through the yajna. 
1093 :Attended by noble devotees, yajna is a great karmic act which is a divine embodiment of the wealth of humanity and the mother earth. 
1094 :Agni, light of omniscience, child of omnipotence, witness of all that is born, lord of food and energy, controller of the masters of cows, earth and all that moves, bless us with all that is great and glorious. 
1095 :That same Agni, bright and blazing, home of existence, visionary of the universe, celebrated with the divine Word, manifesting in infinite forms, shines and reveals the light for us as the wealth of the world. 
1096 :That same Agni, bright and blazing, thunderous force of relentless justice, power operative with your essential light and spirit in the day, in the night and at the dawn, burn with the same fiery essence the evil, the night walkers, daylight robbers and the darkness at dawn. 
1097 :Man of grace and yajna, may the Agni, invoked and raised, be gracious. May the oblations, charities and investments be positive and productive. May our yajna and creative ventures be constructive and fruitful. May our appreciations and appraisals be valuable and enlightening. 
1098 :Man of knowledge, expertise and grace, may all our projects and appraisals be favourable. Do your best so that in our battles against covers of darkness and evil our mind be firm and undisturbed, and then in our battles of life we may endure and be victorious at the end. 
1099 :The spirit by which the forces endure in battles and win, with that spirit strengthen and expand to the full our forces and powers so that we grow firm and inviolable. May we benefit from your gracious gifts, win our battles and enjoy in life. 
1100 :Agnim tarn manye yo vasurastam yam yanti dhenavah. Astamarvanta’asavo’ stain nityaso vajina ’ isam stotrbhya ’ a bhara. 
1101 :I know the Agni that is the hearth and home of existence. Homeward go the cows. The fastest coursers betake to home. The hero, the chariot, the feathered eagle, the stallion, all go home to rest without fail, all by nature. That is the home for me. 
1102 :That same Agni, mother of the home for all, is the ultimate haven. Mother mine, keep for the yajnic children food for life, energy for action, and light for the life divine. 
1103 :Agni is that who is the treasure, home and haven for all in existence. Him I celebrate in song. In Him the words of song find their meaning. Saints of wisdom, geniuses of science most responsive, men of vision most fortunately born, all have their recourse there. Lord of light and life, bear and bring the food, release the energy, and reveal the light of divinity for the celebrants. 
1104 :Graceful power of heat, light and knowledge, you bum two ladles of ghee in the mouth (vedi of yajna) and diffuse the light and fragrance in the air through the cross currents of the wind. Lord of strength and power of creation, fill the stores of food with grain for us and the minds with knowledge for those who offer oblations and chant the hymns of praise in yajna. 
1105 :Brilliant holy Sire of knowledge and power, just as the holy fire burns two ladlefuls of ghee in the vedi to diffuse the light and fragrance in the air, similarly you hold for us the two-fold knowledge of nature and spirit to disseminate it among the disciples who come to the school of yajna for education and sing the songs of the Vedas in praise of Agni, omniscient Lord of light and knowledge. Fill our minds with knowledge and the power of knowledge. 
1106 :Agni, lord of light and knowledge, like the horse broke in to perfection by training, like the holy yajna completed and perfected with the hymns of divine worship, may we now receive that knowledge and virtue which touches the heart and, with you close by us and revelations of that sacred knowledge, come to prosperity and perfection. 
1107 :Agni, lord of light and knowledge, be the sure and unfailing pioneer of noble and creative yajnic work. Be the guide, guardian, defender and leader of the good, efficient and pious people, and prophet of the great truth and universal law of existence. 
1108 :Agni, lord of the golden light of omniscience, in response to these songs of ours in praise of divinity, be pleased at heart and, with all your glory and majesty, come and reveal yourself before us. 
1109 :I know Agni, lord of yajna, receiver and dispenser of libations, generous, treasure home of wealth and the world, child of omnipotence, existent with all that is. I know It as intimately as I know an inspired sage of all knowledge standing face to face. 
1110 :I know the kind and brilliant lord of love and yajna who, with high blazing activity worthy of celebration in divine speech, illuminates and disseminates the splendour of ghrta and the fragrance of vapours through the flames arising from oblations into the fire. 
1111 :Agni, closest you are at hand, most intimate. Be good and kind, redeemer and protector, a very home of supersecurity for all of us. 
1112 :Agni is the omnipresent home of all, treasure of peace and wealth, brilliant leader and pioneer, most refulgent of all, generous giver of prosperity. Here I Lord most blazing, power of splendour and majesty as you are, we pray to you, in faith, for peace and prosperity for ourselves and all our friends. 
1113 :By the austerity of discipline and action the seers come to the sessions of yajna and, lighting and exploring the agni, attain to ages of joy and happiness. By the same discipline, in similar session, at the same level of blissful existence, I commit myself to the pursuit of the same agni which people say pervades the skies. 
1114 :Powers of light and joy, dedicating ourselves in prayer and action to the same Agni, may we attain to the highest and most beloved region of the beautiful world of bliss and noble pursuits with our wives, children, brothers and all our wealth and prosperity. 
1115 :This Agni, power of knowledge, active and wideawake, supporter and protector of the true and the good life, well-established on the face of the earth, lighted and raised, blazes and, in the middle of the chant, ascends to the heights of the skies. 
1116 :If there be any forces that wish to fight the true and the good in life, may the same Agni keep them down and out. 
1117 :This Agni, power of fire and manliness, bravest of all, young and fresh lord of health and age, mighty a thousand fold, shines relentlessly without let up. Glorious on the earth and in the midst of the sky, he inspires and graces wonderful places and positions. 
1118 :Ye men and women all, move together, go close to Agni by the paths of divinity for light and knowledge. Create new paths for the future. 
1119 :Agni, light the paths for humanity. Only in your presence under your guidance can young people as parents follow Dharma under the discipline of piety and continue the yajna and the life-line. 
1120 :Udbudhyasvagne prati jagrhi tv am. is tap u rte sain srjethamayam ca. Asmintsadhasthe ’adhyuttara- smin visve devd yajamdnasca sidata. 
1121 :Agni, lord of light and yajna, wake up and arise in response to the invocation and, in return, awaken and guard the yajamana. Create, together, the desire and will to do the acts necessary as duty and the acts desirable by choice for the sake of complete self- fulfilment. May all the powers of divinity, all the noble people and the yajamana dwell in this auspicious house in this life and after, ever rising higher and higher. 
1122 :Agni, leading power of light and action, by knowledge and karma you bear a hundred burdens of the business of existence through the whole range of duties set out in the Vedas. Carry us too in this yajna of life and lead us into the state of bliss among the noblest souls of the world. 
1123 :Ay am te yonirrtviyo yato jato ’ arocathah. Tam jdnannagna ’a rohatha no vardhaya rayim. 
1124 :Agni, fire and power of life, this home of yajna is your seat of action in accordance with the time and season. From here emerging, you shine and illuminate the world around. Knowing this, proceed and rise, and develop the wealth of life for us. 
1125 :Margashirsha and Phalguna (January-February and February-March) are the months of winter season, cold, cool and pleasant. You are the lovely warmth of the inner-most heart of Agni’s fire. 
1126 :May the heaven and earth be auspicious, may the waters be fresh and invigorating, may the herbs and trees be revitalized and rejuvenating, may all the modes of fire, heat, light, lightning, etc., each committed and constant in its quality and character, be favourable and blissful to me for growth in excellence. 
1127 :May all the vital fires abiding in earth and heaven, integrated and harmonious, supporting and energizing the months of the winter season like the powers of nature serving the omnipotent lord, Indra, bless and vitalize us in all ways. 
1128 :Man of yajna and lady of the house of yajna, both of you joining the months of the season be firm and stay fast with the lord of nature as breath and life together. 
1129 :Lady of knowledge and vision, may the Lord Supreme establish you on top of celestial light for the attainment of full and complete energy of prana, apana and vyana, cross-currents of energy and universal vitality. Spread the universal light of knowledge around for others. Your husband like the sun, brilliant and refulgent, is your lord and protector. Stay firm and secure, steadfast with that noble man like the breath of life. 
1130 :Noble lady of the house, fulfil this life. Fill up the holes, complete and perfect the life and stay firm and stead-fast in this home. May Indra, lord of excellence, Agni, lord of light, and Brihaspati, lord of knowledge, establish you happily in this family home. 
1131 :The people of this land, intelligent, varied, pursuing the origin of life and the powers of nature, and dedicated to the light of heaven in threefold activity of knowledge, action and meditation proclaim the glory and magnanimity of this creator of peace and prosperity who presides over the community. 
1132 :May all the voices exhort and strengthen Indra, leader and president of the land, great and deep as the ocean, bravest of the brave warriors in the battles of progress, promoter of truth and goodness, and protector of life and the human nation. 
1133 :Agni, ruler of the land, just as a horse arises eager for the grass, so whenever you are challenged, you arise from a state of deep peace and, determined for the protection of your people, stand firm and unshakable. Your clarion call and your brilliance rallies the people round and, electrified, they follow you in every movement. 
1134 :Learned woman, lady light of the home, mistress of sunbeams shining in heaven, illuminate the earth and fill the wide skies with brilliance. I place you in the house of your husband — long live he ! I set you in the soothing shade of your protective man, in the very core of his heart deep in love as the bottomless sea. 
1135 :Lady light of the home, growing in generosity as the earth, rising in virtue as the sky, may the Lord Supreme establish you firmly in your heavenly home for full realisation of the joy of living, freedom from suffering, attainment of knowledge, noble strength of character, honour and dignity and high performance of duty. Emanate the light of love and justice. Promote Dharma and piety. And do not pollute the heavens, do not damage the light of learning. 
1136 :May the Sun, supreme light of the world, wholly protect you and bless you with great good fortune, peace of mind and the light of truth. 
1137 :Noble man and virtuous wife, may both of you stay firm and steadfast with that supreme God of life and the universe as with the breath of life. 
1138 :Learned man, you are the master of a thousand facts of life and nature. You are the measure of a thousand confirmations of knowledge. You are the reference and judge for a thousand doubts and questions. You are the lord and authority over a thousand problems of science and existence. May the Lord Omniscient of existence grant you your rightful place in the world for a thousand achievements. 
1139 :Rudra, lord of justice and retribution /Ruler of the land, salutations to you for your righteous passion against the evil and the wicked. And salutations to you for your arrows and armaments. Salutations to you for your mighty arms (that wield the armaments). 
1140 :Thunderbolt to your enemies for their anger against you! Food and support for you! Salutations to your mighty arms to wield the thunderbolt! Rudra, lord of justice, love and peace, lord sublime of the clouds and the mountains, commanding veneration and admiration, the manifestation of your presence is auspicious and blissful, free from fear and magnificent without a shade of sin and darkness. With that same gracious manifestation of your divinity, emanate the blessings of peace and mercy for us. 
1141 :Yamisum girisanta haste bibharsyastave. Sivam giritra tarn kuru ma himsih pur us am jagat. 
1142 :Lord of the showers of clouds, master of mountains of the challenges of existence, the arrow (arm) you hold in hand to shoot upon the enemy, make that an instrument of peace, benevolence and liberation. 
1143 :Saviour of showers and protector of knowledge, do not damage the living world of nature nor hit the world of humanity. 
1144 :Rudra, life of the clouds and spirit of the mountain breeze, we praise you and pray to you in words of faith and fidelity so that by your gifts and grace we may be at peace in the heart and this whole world be free from depression and consumptive diseases. 
1145 :Rudra, lord of life, chief advisor and divine physician, speak to us on matters of health and, destroying all the snake-like deadly germs and viruses, root out all the debilitating and fatal diseases. 
1146 :And the sun which is copper red, bright red and reddish brown (in the morning, in the day and toward the evening) is auspicious and efficacious. And the thousands of heavenly bodies, planets and satellites, etc., sustained around in all the directions, we pray, be good and protective for all of us. 
1147 :And the sun which is descending dark-necked behind the clouds like a peacock and reddish toward the evening is auspicious and efficacious. The cowherds see it, the water-carriers see it, and seen thus it acts as a healing power for us. 
1148 :Salutations to the blue-necked power of the healing sun. Salutations to the lord of the light of a thousand eyes. Salutation to the lord of the rain showers of health. And to those powers, too, which are floating around as planets and satellites bearing the essence of its healing power, we offer our salutations in homage. 
1149 :Glorious lord of power and defence, stretch and release the string at the two ends of the bow and shoot the arrows which are in your hand at the target yonder. 
1150 :May the awful bow of the lord of braided hair never be without the string. May his arrows never be without the point. May his arms be never destroyed. May his armoury never be void of arms. 
1151 :Lord of the richest showers of health and joy, the thunderbolt that is in your hand and the mighty bow, with these weapons of defence against suffering, protect us all round and promote our health and prosperity. 
1152 :Lord of the bow, may the strike of your missile spare us and protect us from all sides. And your armoury in which you keep the missiles, keep it far from us to direct it on the enemy. 
1153 :Lord of a thousand eyes, wielder of a hundred arms, having sharpened the points of the arrows, having bent the bow and stretched the string, pleased and kind at heart, be good and gracious to us. 
1154 :Salutations to the warrior. Salutations to the force at rest in readiness. Salutations to the determined commander. Salutations to you, man of the bow, for both your arms of valour. 
1155 :Md no mahantamuta md no ’arbhakam md na ’ uksantamuta md na’uksitam. Md no vadhlh pitaram mota mdtaram md nah priyastanvo rudra ririsah. 
1156 :Rudra, commander of the army, strike not our seniors, nor our children, nor our young married men, nor the nation in the womb. Kill not our father, nor mother, nor our dear ones. Strike not our women, the sick, the delicate and the weak. They must not suffer any harm or injury. 
1157 :Ma nastoke tanaye ma ’na ayusi ma no gosu ma no ’asvesu firisah. Ma no viran rudra bhdmino vadhirhavismantah sadamit tva havamalie. 
1158 :Rudra, strike not the babies, nor the children, damage not life, kill not our cows, nor our horses. Kill not our darling young people, handsome and so brave are they. Carrying libations of love and faith we always invoke you and pray. 
1159 :Salutations to Rudra, warrior of the golden arms of steel. Salutations to the lord protector of the nation in all directions. Love and care for the trees of green foliage. All hail to the lord protector and promoter of animals. All reverence and faith for the light of justice and controller of wild passion. Salutations to the protector of travellers, and promoter of the highways. Love and reverence for the golden-haired wearer of the sacred thread initiated in learning. Salutations to the protector and promoter of the young and strong rising generation. 
1160 :Salutations to Rudra, brown breaker of the enemies. Salutations to the protector and promoter of food. Salutations to the saviour warrior of existence. Salutations to the lord of the moving worlds. Exhortations to the warrior up in arms. Salutations to the regions of the world. Salutations to the pioneer of love and leader of humanity. Salutations to the lord protector of the forests. 
1161 :Salutations to Rudra, red-haired lover and promoter of art and architecture. All hail to the lord protector of trees. Salutations to the lord of the expanding world and creator of wealth. Salutations to the lord of herbs and medicine. Salutations to the thoughtful planner, and the powers of commerce and industry. Salutations to the lord of woods and plantations. Salutations to the mighty roar against the enemies of life. Salutations to the lord protector of the pedestrians, wayfarers and the foot-soldiers. 
1162 :Salutations to the lord industrious of total growth. Salutations to the lord protector of assets. Salutations to the lord of challenge, endurance and victory. Salutations to the supersessor of challenging emergencies. Salutations to the lord of full armour in readiness. Salutations to the lord of hope and optimism. Salutations to the controller of thieves and corruption. Salutations to the lord of relentless work and development. Salutations to the lord of love and service of life and humanity. Salutations to the lord of forests and forest life. 
1163 :Salutations to the controller of thugs, superthugs and clandestine robbers. Salutations to the lord of constant watch and deployment of missiles. Salutations to the lord eliminater of smugglers. Constant watch over the killer men of the lance and thunderbolt to them. Salutations to the controller of swindlers. Watch and punishment to the swordsmen night walkers. All hail to the challenger and controller of national disunity, division and defilement. 
1164 :distinction. Salutations to the chief of the mountainers. Salutations to the controller of the antisocial mischief. Salutations to the men of the arrow and the missile. Salutations to the men of the bow and the carrier rocket. Salutations to you again and again. Salutations to those who advance the line of defence and security. Salutations to the forces of offence in defence. Salutations to the keepers of law and order. Salutations to the marksmen who take on the target. 
1165 :Salutations to those who shoot at evil. Salutations to those who strike down the evil. Salutations to you all. Care and caution for those who sleep. Exhortation to those who wake. Salutations to all of you. Care for those who rest. Appreciation for those who sit in position. Salutations to those who stand fast. Cheers for those who run for humanity. 
1166 :Salutations to the councils of governance and administration. Salutations to the heads of councils. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the cavalry. Salutations to the cavalry commanders. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the forces of defence. Salutations to the forces in action. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the forces in reserve for reinforcement. Salutations to the advancing and routing forces. Salutations to you all. 
1167 :Salutations to autonomous communities. Salutations to the heads of autonomous communities. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the dominions. Salutations to the heads of dominions. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the guilds of expert professionals. Salutations to the heads of expert associations. Salutations to the mixed and multiform communities. Salutations to the heads of multicultural communities. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the international associations. Salutations to the heads of world associations. Salutations to you all. 
1168 :Salutations to the armies. Salutations to the commanders of the armies. Salutations to the fighters on rathas, tanks and warplanes. Salutations to the warriors without the rathas (warriors on foot). Salutations to you all. Salutations to the warriors and the administrators. Salutations to the supply corps. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the seniors, veterans and the great. Salutations to the small, the young and the recruits. Salutations to you all. 
1169 :Salutations to the wood carvers and craftsmen. Salutations to the manufacturers of vehicles. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the manufacturers of ceramics. Salutations to the metallurgists. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the hill and forest rangers. Salutations to the fishermen and pisciculturists. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the dog-squads and the canine experts. Salutations to the hunters and the experts of wild animals. Salutations to you all. 
1170 :Namah svabhyah svapatibhyasca vo namo namo bhavaya ca rudraya ca namah sarvaya ca pasupataye ca namo nilagrivaya ca sitikanthaya ca. 
1171 :Food for the dogs, recognition and incentive for the breeders and trainers of dogs. Salutations to you all. Salutations to the lord creator of the world. Homage to the lord of maintenance with justice and retribution. Salutations to the ultimate destroyer. Salutations to the lord protector of the animals. Salutations to the lord of the blue clouds. Salutations to the lord of the mighty voice of thunder. 
1172 :Namah kapardine ca vyuptakesaya ca namah saliasraksaya ca satadhanvane ca namo girisayaya ca sipivistaya ca namo midhustamaya cesumate ca. 
1173 :to the sage of shaven hair. Salutations to the lord of vision of a thousand eyes. Salutations to the wielder of a hundred bows. Homage to the sagely mountain dweller. Salutations to the protector and promoter of the animal wealth. Salutations to the lord supreme of showers for life. Salutations to the lord of arrows. 
1174 :Namo hrasvaya ca vamanaya ca namo brhate ca varsiyase ca namo vrddhaya ca savrdhe ca namo ’gryaya ca prathamaya ca. 
1175 :Food and support for the child and the little darling. Salutations for the great and for the generous man of years. Reverence for the old and love for the youth growing together. Exhortation for the pathmaker and for the first among pioneers of initiative. 
1176 :Natna’ asave cajiraya ca namah sighryaya ca slbhyaya ca nama’ urmyaya cavasvanyaya ca namo nadeyaya ca dvipyaya ca. 
1177 :All hail to men of instant response and to the men of spontaneous action. Cheers for the fast worker and incentive for the modes of speedy motion. Exhortation to the powers of rapid progress and to men of roaring business. All hail to the river projects and to the island explorers. 
1178 :Namo jyesthaya ca kanisthdya ca namah purva- jdya caparajaya ca namo madhyamaya ca- pagalbhdya ca namo jaghanyaya ca budhnyaya ca. 
1179 :All hail to the oldest and the youngest. Honour and respect to the traditional and the modern. Full recognition and support for the average medium and the simple novice. All support for the lowest worker and reverence for the wise and generous. 
1180 :Namah sobhyaya ca pratisaryaya ca namo yamyaya ca ksemydya ca namah slokyaya cd- vasanyaya ca nama urvaryaya ca khalyaya ca. 
1181 :Salutations to the prosperous and the virtuous. Salutations to the dispensers of justice and the preservers of happiness and welfare. Salutations to the scholar of vaidic voice and to the competent man of accomplishment. Salutations to the man commanding respect among the nobles, and to the master of creating means and materials for good living. 
1182 :Namo vanyaya ca kaksyaya ca namah sravdya ca pratisravaya ca nama asusenaya ca- surathdya ca namah surdya cavabhedine ca. 
1183 :Food and protection for the forest habitations and those living close thereby. Salutations to the reputed man of the Veda and to his listener disciple. Salutations to the warrior of the army on the fastest move and the commander on the fastest vehicle. Salutations to the brave soldier who breaks through the defences of the enemy. 
1184 :Namo bilmine ca kavacine ca namo vannine ca varuthine ca namah srutaya ca srutasenaya ca namo dundubhyaya cahananyaya ca. 
1185 :Salutations to the warrior with the helmet. Salutations to the knight in armour. Salutations to the soldier in the bunker. Salutations to the force manning the fort of defence. Salutations to the reputed hero. Salutations to commander of the famous army. Exhortation to the drummer. Bravo to the martial man of music. 
1186 :Namo dhrsnave ca pramrsaya ca namo nisah- gine cesudhimate ca namastiksnesave ca- yudhine ca namah svayudhaya ca sudhanvane ca. 
1187 :Salutations to the bold and fearless. Salutations to the shrewd and reflective man of thought and deliberation, and to the kind and the courteous. Salutations to the man of the sword and to the hero of the pointed arrow and quiver. Salutations to the man of mighty warriors of invincible arms. Salutations to the wielder of superweapons and to the man of the mighty bow. 
1188 :Namah srutyaya ca pathyaya ca namah katyaya ca nlpyaya ca namah kulyaya ca sarasyaya ca namo nadeyaya ca vaisantdya ca. 
1189 :All hail and support for those who live by the side-walks, springs and trails. Welcome and hospitality for the travellers on the high roads and all support for the keepers of the roads. Care and caution for the mountain pass and the foot-hills and all support for those who live thereby. All love and care and reverence for streams and lakes, rivers and rivulets, pools and tanks, and all hail and hospitality for the users and keepers of these. Salutations, exhortations and cheers to those who love and live by these ! Najnah kupyaya cavatyaya ca namo vidhryaya cdtapydya ca namo meghyaya ca vidyutyaya ca namo varsyaya cavarsyaya ca. 
1190 :Salutations to the specialist of well construction. Salutations to the drilling geologist. Salutations to the scientist explorer of the clear blue sky in the sunlight. Salutations to the expert of solar heat and energy. Salutations to the technologist of cloud formation. Salutations to the scientist and technologist of lightning and electricity. Salutations to the scholar and scientist of rain and water management. Salutations to the scientist of drought and drought management. 
1191 :Namo vatyaya ca resmyaya ca namo vastavyaya ca vastupaya ca namah somaya ca rudraya ca namastamraya carunaya ca. 
1192 :Salutations to the expert of wind and storm. Salutations to the scientist of cloud burst and thunder. Salutations to the specialist of surplus and waste management. Salutations to the man of housing and architecture. Salutations to the expert of health and power. Salutations to the minister of justice and equity. Salutations to the powers of security against violence and crime. Salutations to the promoters of Dharma and the good life. 
1193 :Namah sahgave ca pasupataye ca nama ugraya ca bhimaya ca namo’ grevadhaya ca dure- vadliaya ca namo liantre ca hamyase ca namo vrksebhyo harikesebhyo namastaraya. 
1194 :Salutations to the lord of peace and protector of living beings. Salutations to the lord of power and awe. Salutations to the powers of preventive strike and consequent elimination. Punishment to the killer and the destructive terrorist. Water and care for the trees of green foliage. Salutations to the saviour from suffering. 
1195 :Namah sambhavaya ca mayobhavaya ca namah sahkaraya ca mayaskaraya ca namah sivaya ca sivataraya ca. 
1196 :Salutations to the lord of peace, and to the lord giver of peace and joy in life. Salutations to the lord of prosperity, and to the lord giver of prosperity. Salutations to the lord of peace, prosperity and grace, and to the lord giver of peace, prosperity and grace more and ever more. 
1197 :Namah paryaya cavaryaya ca namah pratarnaya cottaranaya ca namastirthyaya ca kulyaya ca namah saspyaya ca phenyaya ca. 
1198 :Salutations to the lord across the river, and to him this side of the flow. And salutations to the captain who steers all across the seas, and to him who steers across and above. And salutations to him who is both the guide and the goal and to him who awaits us on the shore. And salutations to him who shines green in vegetation, and to him who floats with the foam. 
1199 :Namah sikatyaya ca pravahyaya ca namah kimsilaya ca ksayanaya ca namah kapardine ca pulastaye ca nama ’irinyaya ca prapathyaya ca. 
1200 :Homage to the gold in the sand, and to him who flows with the flow. And homage to him who plays with the pebbles, and to him who dwells in the tranquil harbour. Homage to the lord of the braided hair and to him who shines with glossy hair. Homage to the lord of the desert and to the protector of the wandering sages. 
1201 :Namo vrajyaya ca gosthyaya ca namastalpyaya ca gehyaya ca namo hrdayyaya ca nivesyaya ca namah katyaya ca gahvaresthaya ca. 
1202 :Homage to the lord of the meadow and to the warmth of the cow-shed. Homage to the angels of the bed and to the inmates of the home. Homage to the spirit in the heart and to the lord of human settlements. Homage to the mountain mysteries and to the spirit of the darkest caves. 
1203 :Namah suskyaya ca harityaya ca namah paihsavyaya ca rajasyaya ca namo lopyaya co- lapyaya ca natna urvyaya ca survyaya ca. 
1204 :Homage to the spirit of the desert breeze and vibrations of the greens. Homage to the life of the dust and atoms of fragrance in the flowers. Homage to the spirit of the invisible and the softness of the grass. Homage to the lord of ocean fire and the fire of annihilation. 
1205 :Namah parnaya ca parnasadaya ca nama’ udguramanaya cabhighnate ca nama ’ akhidate ca prakhidate ca nama’ isukrdbhyo dhanus- krdbhyasca vo namo namo vah kirikebhyo devanam hrdayebhyo namo vicinvatkebhyo namo viksinatkebhyo nama’ anirhatebhyah. 
1206 :Homage to the spirit of the green leaves and to the fall of the leaves. Homage to the clarion call of action and to the destroyer of evil. All help and sustenance to the wearied and the oppressed. Homage to the makers of arrows and missiles and to the makers of bows and firing rockets. Homage to the noble hearts and the sparkling showers of their grace. Homage to the powers of discrimination between good and evil. Homage to the destroyers of oppression and to the upliftment and redemption of the fallen and the destitute. 
1207 :Redeemer of the fallen, lord of food and sustenance, saviour of the poor and down-trodden, lord of growth and greenery, cause no fear to these people and these animals. Cause no ailment or injury. Let none of us suffer any disease or damage. 
1208 :All our thoughts and intentions, all our songs and devotion, and all our man-power we hold and dedicate to Rudra, awful lord of the knotted hair, commander of our young and brave heroes, so that there may be peace and well-being among our people and our animals (bipeds and quadrupeds), and life in this whole habitable world may be healthy, strong and free from want and suffering. 
1209 :Rudra, lord of health and well-being, your auspicious presence in body and mind, your knowledge and approach is gracious, a panacea for all ailments, universal antidote to suffering and disease. With that healing touch bless us with good health and happiness for life. 
1210 :May the thunderbolt of Rudra spare us. May the evil disposition of the sinful and the angry keep off from us. May the generous lord giver of life and prosperity elevate the intelligence and constancy of the munificent yajnics and be kind and gracious to our children and our youth. 
1211 :Most generous lord, most gracious, be good at heart and kind toward us all. Taking up the arms, wearing the corslet, holding the great bow, come and take on the mighty force of the enemies of life. 
1212 :Salutations to you, Rudras, lords lustrous and glorious, shooting arrows to destroy evil. And the thousand thunderbolts you wield, they may spare us and fall elsewhere on mischief far away from us. 
1213 :Lord of majesty and ruler of the world, hundreds and thousands are the arms and powers in your hands. Turn their shaft and direction away and elsewhere far from us. 
1214 :Thousands are the Rudras (life-sustaining powers) and countless are the Rudras (pranis, living forms) which are on the earth. We use their powers and properties in a thousand ways and, (in cyclic order) extend their powers and properties a thousand fold over vast areas of space. 
1215 :Countless are the Rudra powers in this great ocean of the sky between the earth and heaven. We use their powers and properties in a thousand applications and in cyclic order, extend their powers and properties a thousand-fold over vast areas in space. 
1216 :Blue-necked and white-throated, countless are the Rudra powers of life and sustenance which abide in heaven and the light of the sun. We use their energies and powers in a thousand ways for a thousand purposes and, in a positive circle, extend their powers and properties a thousand-fold over vast areas of space. 
1217 :Blue-necked, white-throated are the violent powers and ferocious creatures which roam around on the earth. We counter and throw off their powers and forces countless leagues away from us with the bows we stretch to shoot the arrows. 
1218 :We counter the Rudra powers, blue-necked, white throated, yellowish red, bright and green like blades of grass, which grow on trees as parasites, and, stretching our bows for the arrows (with insecticides etc.,) render their deadly action ineffective over vast areas of the earth. 
1219 :The powers who are protectors, promoters and guardians of living beings, sanyasis and brahmacharis with shaven heads or wearing unshorn hair, we help and serve, and, with all our power and means, we extend their activities over vast areas of the earth. 
1220 :The Rudras, noble people, who guard and promote the moral and spiritual highways of life, who maintain and develop the national highways and protect the travellers, who develop the resources of the earth, and who struggle for the betterment of life and age, we support and serve with all our might and extend their We do homage to the Rudras, sacred presences who cleanse the mind and sanctify the soul, heroes who go round wielding the thunderbolt and the bow and quiver in defence of humanity. We support and serve them with all our might and extend their power a thousand fold over vast areas of the earth. 
1221 :The infectious germs and viruses in food and drink and in the cooking and dining ware which, in various ways, afflict the people through eating and drinking, we fight with all our might, and we eliminate their deadly power and presence over a vast area of the earth and the environment. 
1222 :And Rudra powers (of beneficence, affliction and retribution in nature) conceived and realized so far and even more exist variously in all the directions (on the earth, in the sky and in heaven). We deal with their arms and armaments appropriately with all our might and mind in faith (worshipping, extending, negating or fighting and eliminating) in a thousand ways over vast areas of time and space. 
1223 :Namo’stu rudrebhyo ye divi yesain varsa- misavah. Tebhyo dasa pracirdasa daksind dasa praficirdasodicirdasordhvah. Tebhyo namo ’astu te no’ vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo Yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 
1224 :Homage to the Rudras that abide in heaven. Rain is their power and gift to life. To them our salutations with folded hands with ten fingers joined, with ten senses and ten pranas. For them the ten directions east, ten directions south, ten directions west, ten directions north, and ten directions above; all these for them to pervade and operate. Salutations to them! May they protect us! May they bless us! Whosoever we hate, whosoever hate us, him we deliver unto their power for judgement and redress. 
1225 :Namo’stu rudrebhyo ye’ntarikse yesam vata isavah Tebhyo dasa pracirdasa daksina dasa praficirdasodicirdasordhvah. Tebhyo namo ’astu te no’vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 
1226 :Homage to the Rudras that abide in the skies. Wind and air is their power and gift to life. To them our salutations with folded hands with the fingers joined, with ten senses and the pranas. For them the ten directions east, ten directions south, ten directions west, ten directions north, and ten directions above; all these for them to pervade and operate. Salutations to them! May they protect us! May they bless us! Whosoever we hate, whosoever hate us, him we deliver unto their power for judgement and redress. 
1227 :Namo ’ stu rudrebhyo ye prthivyam yesamanna- misavah. Tebhyo dasa pracirdasa daksina dasa praficirdasodicirdasordhvah. Tebhyo namo’ astu te no ’vantu te no mrdayantu te yam dvismo yasca no dvesti tamesam jambhe dadhmah. 
1228 :Homage to the Rudras that abide on the earth. Food and energy is their power and gift to life. To them our salutations with folded hands with ten fingers joined, with ten senses and ten pranas. For them the ten directions east, ten directions south, ten directions west, ten directions north, and ten directions above; all these for them to pervade and operate. Salutations to them! May they protect us! May they bless us! Whosoever we hate, whosoever hate us, him we deliver unto their power for judgement and redress. 
1229 :O Maruts (men and women), kind and generous powers, hold for us the energy and power contained in the mountain ranges of the clouds and the sky, and hold for us that energy and juices distilled from waters, herbs and trees, and bless us with that food and energy. Voracious eater, fire of yajna, may your hunger and energy be in me too, and may your displeasure reach someone we hate (i.e., none). 
1230 :Ima me ’agna ’istaka dhenavah santveka ca dasa ca dasa ca satam ca satam ca sahasram ca saliasram cayutam cayutam ca niyutam ca niyutam ca prayutam carbudam ca nyarbudam Agni, fire-lord of yajna, may these bricks of my altar (vedi), wanted values of life, one and all, be generous and productive and grow ten times in geometrical progression : May one grow to ten, and ten to one hundred (shatam), and one hundred to one thousand (sahasram), and one thousand to ten thousand (ayutam), and ten thousand to hundred thousand (one lac, niyutam), and hundred thousand to a million (prayutam), and one million to hundred million (arbudam), and hundred million to a billion (arba, nyarbudam), and one billion to ten billion (one kharba), and ten billion to a hundred billion (one nikharba), and hundred billion to a trillion (mahapadma), and one trillion to ten trillion (one shanku), and ten trillion to hundred trillion (one samudra), and hundred trillion to quadrillion (one madhyam), and one madhyam to ten madhyam (anta, ten quadrillion), and one anta to ten anta (hundred quadrillion), parardha. And these bricks, wanted values, be, like cows, the givers of fulfilment to me in this life and beyond, in this world and beyond. 
1231 :Ladies of the home brilliant as yajna fire, holy as truth and universal law, reflecting the plenty and purity of distilled ghee and overflowing with the sweetness of honey, you are surely treasures of fulfilment beyond decay. Be vibrant as spring, stay inviolable as the cycle of the seasons and add to the sanctity of the laws of life. 
1232 :Agni, brilliant power, we stand round and cover you as the shaivala grass of the sea. Cleanser and purifier of life, be good and gracious to us. 
1233 :Agni, brilliant power, we cover you round as fire and clothing round the frosty cold of the season. Come, cleanser and purifier of life, and be kind and gracious to us. 
1234 :Agni, clad in the brilliant flames of light, come upon the earth, descend in the midst of the earth’s abundance. Descend into the streams of life. Since you are the life and lustre of the waters, come with that life and lustre. Come and bless this yajna of our home with peace and prosperity. 
1235 :This home is the abode of peace as the sky is the abode of waters. It is an abode of the depth of life as the deep ocean is. May Agni, lord of yajna and life and lustre of the waters be kind and gracious to us in this home of yajna, and may the heat of his passion and displeasure be directed elsewhere away from us. 
1236 :Agni, generous lord of light, purifier and sanctifier of life, with your brilliant and exhilarating tongue of flames you call the noble yajnic devotees together and proclaim to them the truths of eternity. 
1237 :Agni, power of light and lustre, purifier and sanctifier of life, you graciously call the noble powers of nature and humanity together here close to our yajna and let us all share the gifts of the fragrance of libations. 
1238 :Pavakaya yascitayantya krpa ksaman ruruca’ usaso na bhanuna. Turvan na yamannetasasya nu rana ’ a yo ghrne na tatrsano ’ ajarah. 
1239 :Agni, lord of light and power, commander of the army, with his cleansing, enlightening and splendid force, shines on the earth like the dawn blazing with the light of the sun. And young, unaging, unexhausted, hastening apace on the course of his chariot, thirsting for victory in the heat of the battle, blazes with his own glory. 
1240 :Salutations to Agni, lord of light and justice, radiant and pure, divine and adorable, and saviour from pain and suffering. Lord sanctifier of life and nature, be good and gracious to us. And may the heat of your passion and punishment for sin and injustice fall upon others far from us, i.e. different from real human nature and character. 
1241 :Homage to Agni, lord present in and presiding over humanity. Homage to the lord present in and ruling over the waters. Homage to the lord governing within and over the business of society. Homage to the lord present in and ruling over the forests. Homage to the lord creator and giver of the joy of life. 
1242 :Pranas (Sanyasis, those who are the life-breath of the spirit of society), those who are noblest among the nobles, adorable among those who adore Agni in yajna, serve and receive their part of the annual sessions of yajna, and, free from the performance of yajna before meals, themselves receive and enjoy the honey-sweets and drinks of the libations in this yajna. 
1243 :Ye dev a devesvadhi devatvamayan ye brahmanah pura ’etaro ’ asya. Yebhyo na ’rte pavate dhama kihcana na te divo na prthivya ’adhi snusu. 
1244 :Pranas, life-breath of the spirit of humanity, souls who have attained the state of divine grace among the nobles, who walk in the very presence of this Lord of the universe, without whom nowhere in the world anything moves nor is anything sanctified, they are not confined to any particular region of heaven, nor to any particular region of the earth, they are universal, everywhere. 
1245 :Agni, Lord of light and power, you are the giver of vital energy, means of the removal of impurity and waste, universal knowledge, lustre of life and the light of truth and Dharma. Be good and gracious to us, lord purifier and sanctifier of life and soul, and let your displeasure and punishment befall somewhere else far away from us. 
1246 :Agni, lord giver of light, knowledge and power, with its incessant waves of light and warmth ripens and begets all good nourishing foods for us. The same agni with the power of electric energy begets all the wealth for us. (So may the man of knowledge and scientific power produce food and wealth for humanity.) Our father, Vishvakarma, omniscient lord and cosmic sacrificer (yajamana), consumes all these worlds into His own fire of cosmic yajna and remains. And then He, self-moved by His own will to create the profuse variety of existence, projects and pervades the first evolutes and later continues the expansion and self pervasion on and on. 
1247 :What is the ultimate stay of the universe? What is the original cause of the creation? What sort? From which Vishvakarma, omnipresent seer who pervades the universe, created the earth and then heaven with His mighty potential? Vishvakarma, the one absolute self-effulgent lord of the universe, with universal eye to watch, and universal mouth to reveal the Word, and universal arms for action, and universal feet for omnipresence, having created the heaven and earth from dynamic particles of Prakriti, keeps the universe in constant motion with his mighty arms of omnipotence. 
1248 :What is that original cause, that lovely tree, from which the lord maker shaped the heaven and earth and the whole dynamic world? Men of intelligence and conscientious mind ask the men of wisdom and vision: Who is that lord who holds and sustains the regions of the world and presides over all these and yet remains the sole lord above the universe? Vishvakarma, lord of your own omnipotence, lord of nature, heaven and earth, maker of the universe, enlighten us, your friends and devotees, about the worlds of your own creation, the highest, the lowest and youngest, and the middle ones. Lord of food and energy, expanding the material world of existence, you yourself provide for sustenance with constant inputs into the systemic growth of the universe. 
1249 :by the celebration and offerings of yajna, bless the earth and heaven with your presence. May the others, enemies of life and progress all round, fail. And may Indra, lord of power and glory, of wealth and learning, be the harbinger of knowledge and wisdom. 
1250 :For our protection and progress in the battle of life to day we invoke Vishvakarma, lord of knowledge and speech, universal master of all karma working at speed faster than that of mind. May he, beneficent lord of unfailing action, kind and generous to all, be pleased to listen to our invocation and grant our prayers for protection and progress. 
1251 :Vishvakarma, lord President of the total activity of humanity/the nation, with the growth and advancement arising from the developmental activities of the people working with yajnic dedication in unison, we pray, appoint Indra, a man of power and glory as minister for defence who should be an inviolable defender of the world/the land, so that all the people bow to him in acceptance and reverence and (with that universal support) he becomes mighty and formidable in action. 
1252 :When the ruler, Vishvakarma, is of calm and resolute mind, loves and protects men of vision and justice, and promotes the creation of food and wealth, and when the people bow to him in obedience and act in unison like parts of one organism, then only the people and the government strengthen each other and grow like the earth and heaven of yore together. 
1253 :Vishvakarma is the one lord maker of the world, sole treasure-home of universal knowledge, present in the universal variety of existence, creator and sustainer of the universe, all-seeing universal presence and supreme reality, whom the wise sages call one and absolute, wherein the humans with their five senses, mind and intelligence rejoice and wherein they realise their supreme ambitions. 
1254 :Yo nah pita janita yo vidhata dhdmdni veda bhuvandni visva. Yo devanam namadha ’eka ’eva tain samprasnam bhuvana yantyanya. 
1255 :Vishvakarma is the lord who is our father and creator, law-giver and sustainer, who knows all the regions of the universe, who is one and absolute yet holds the names of all the powers of nature and His own potential. In Him enter all the worlds, and He is the eternal question and mystery for all the conscientious souls. 
1256 :la ’ayajanta dravinain samasma ’rsayah purve jaritaro na bhuna. Asurte surte rajasi nisatte ye bhutani samakrnvannimani. 
1257 :They are the Rishis, visionaries of Divinity, who, like celebrants in worship, have offered songs and libations of rich materials to Lord Vishvakarma and who, residing in known as well as in unknown worlds, have directed and attracted the mind and soul of living beings to the lord. 
1258 :The Lord Supreme, Brahma, is beyond the heavens, beyond this earth, beyond the gods of nature and beyond the evil and the lifeless. He is the One wherein the life-force bears the first grand and mysterious seed of the universe and whom the primordeal visionaries of divinity see directly as if face to face. 
1259 :Therein surely the life-force bore that first seed of the universe wherein all the powers of nature and the visionary souls find their repose. He is the one sole lord seated at the centre of the mother force, Prakriti, and he is the lord presiding over existence, wherein reside all the worlds of the universe. 
1260 :You don’t know Him who has created all these worlds. He is different and distant from you all, and yet within you all. People sunk in darkness roam around quoting scripture but serving their own selfish ends with empty words void of vision. 
1261 :Lord Vishvakarma, creator of the world, self- effulgent lord of light and life, first manifested in existence. Then after that was bom the sun which holds the earth. The third was the cloud which, in its womb, holds the waters, offspring of the sky and the winds, vital air, and generates and sustains the herbs and trees in many ways. 
1262 :He alone is Indra, worthy to be commander of the army, who is swift and instant in action and wields blazing deadly weapons in readiness, who roars with strength like a bull and strikes fear, terror and panic in the enemy force, who is constantly watchful and a fearless challenger, who is a matchless hero, rallies the force at the call and with us comes out victorious over a hundred armies of the enemy. 
1263 :Ye men of war, challenge, engage and defeat that enemy force and be victorious with that commander, Indra, bold and daring, alert and watchful, thirsting for victory, master of tactical deployment and engagement of forces, informidable, fully armed and overwhelming the enemy with a rain of arrows/bullets/missiles. 
1264 :That warrior, router of the enemy, Indra, self- controlled, lover of exhilarating soma and defender of peace, creator and commander of the army, strong of arm, wielder of mighty weapons and awful marksman, supported by his well-selected and well-deployed army highly equipped with arms and armaments, defeats the collective forces of the enemies. 
1265 :Brihaspati, commander of the mighty army, destroyer of the wicked, repulsing the enemy, routing his force and causing havoc all round by your chariot, you come out victorious over the violent and the evil in the battle. Be the protector and defender of our chariots and the wheels of the nation’s economy. 
1266 :Indra, expert of army management, veteran tactician, admirable soldier, steadfast and resolute fighter, man of patience and endurance, mighty and victorious, fast and terrible, hero of heroes, admiration of the great and intelligent, lustrous and powerful, honoured by the victorious, master of effective communication and reconnaissance of territory, take to your chariot and ride across the earth, over the seas and into the skies. 
1267 :Friends, countrymen, children of mother earth, with all your might and main, follow this Indra, commander of the army, hand in hand. Join him in battle and display your valour and heroism with him who is a master of tactical code of signals and reconnaissance of enemy territory, wields the thunderbolt in hand, breaks through the enemy lines, routs the forces, destroys the enemy and wins the battle. 
1268 :Indra, valiant commander, relentless warrior of a hundred fold righteous ardour, penetrating deep into enemy defences with his strength of armour, irresistible, invincible, victor of enemy forces, may direct and defend our army and lead it to victory. 
1269 :The commander of those noble and enlightened armies which break down and conquer the forces of evil in life is Indra, a man of power and grandeur; he is Brihaspati, a man of grandeur, knowledge and magnanimity; he is Soma, the man of magnanimity, peace and joy; he is the candid expert on the right side of the nation; he is the clarion call for unity and progress, and he is the first among all to take the lead in advance in a crisis. At his call the Maruts, commandos of the first order, must storm the citadel of the enemy. 
1270 :The battle cry of the bold and fierce army consisting of brilliant, stormy, magnanimous, noble and victorious soldiers of the powerful, virile and celebrated ruler should rise high to the sky shaking the enemy with fright. 
1271 :Lord of power and glory, destroyer of the darkest enemy clouds, refine and sharpen the arms and armaments of our forces, boost the morale of our soldiers, accelerate the speed and raise the fire power of our horses and rockets, and let the roar of our victorious tanks and chariots rise to the skies and rend the clouds. 
1272 :When the flags fly high and the battle rages, may our leader and commander, Indra, and our arms and arrows be victorious. May our valiant warriors win and live happy ever after. May the noble scholars and sages and the warriors and tacticians protect us through the challenges and battles of life and life’s values. 
1273 :Valiant women’s corps, dazzling and bewildering the mind of those enemies, engage their troops in action and overthrow them far. Advancing deep into their ranks, bum them at heart and afflict them so that they may regret and lie low covered with darkness and sorrow. 
1274 :Valiant women’s corps, trained by the military experts of the Vedas, commanded and exhorted by the leader, shooting like an arrow, go far and fall upon the enemies. Go deep and take them all, do not spare any one of them. 
1275 :Valiant warriors, go, advance and win. May Indra grant you victory and joy. May your arms be strong and bold so that no one may be able to challenge you and you remain free and invincible. 
1276 :Warriors, intelligent, bold and fierce, yonder is that army of the others, rivals, which marches upon us out of jealousy to surround and overcome us with all their might. Cover that with repellent smoke in utter darkness so that they may fail even to perceive each other. 
1277 :Where the arrows strike all round and young soldiers fall like children shorn of hair at play, there Indra, lord of power and glory, and Brihaspati, lord of this great world, and the Great Council of Mother Earth itself may grant us peace. May they grant us peace and well-being for all time. 
1278 :Noble warrior, victorious hero, I cover your vital limbs with a protective armour. May Soma, lord of health and well-being, ruler of all, wrap you round in happiness and immortality. May Varuna, lord supreme, grant you honour greater than greatness itself. May all the noble powers of the earth bless you with joy, victorious one. 
1279 :worshipped with libations of ghee and fragrant materials, take this yajamana, ruler, victor, to higher and higher states of honour and glory. Bless him with the wealth of life and good health. Let him rise and grow with a good family and noble children. 
1280 :Indra, lord of power and glory, take this warrior victor to that high state of ethics and policy whereby he may rise to organise, control and rule over his fellow citizens, children of the mother land. Bless him with the light and lustre of life and learning so that he is able to do his duty to the noble people, powers of nature and God. 
1281 :Agni, lord of light and learning, lead the man in whose home we perform the yajna to the high road of progress and prosperity. Let the noblest people speak high of him and to him. And so may this scholar of the Vedas speak to him and about him. 
1282 :Agni, lord of power and glory, may all the noble people of the land with their heart and soul accept, approve, support and raise you to the heights. And you too, so high and noble, a very image of nobility and magnanimity, be good and kind to us. 
1283 :May all the five directions of space replete with the celestial generosity of nature protect and promote yajna. May the intelligent and pious women, brahmacharinis and wives of saints and scholars, preventing and dispelling ignorance and evil genius, supporting and serving the yajnapati in the growth of health and wealth, protect and promote yajna in the household. 
1284 :May the yajna and the household be established in good health, wealth and progress in well-being. 
1285 :That yajna, adorable, praiseworthy, flying high on the wings of Vaidic verses, accepted and honoured of yore, which the ancient sages performed with libations of boiled ghee into the flaming fire, that same yajna, noble people, you also accept and perform with the same devotion and enthusiasm. 
1286 :Noble people sit with the noble people round the fire, performing yajna for the noble people in honour of the divine powers. 
1287 :Let the noble people take to the noble yajamana, a man endowed with wealth of virtue, generosity of heart and plenty of sumptuous food and drink, and let them perform the yajna in honour of the heavenly lord, sustainer of the world and loving father of his children. 
1288 :The dynamic and blissful libations of fragrant materials, offered by the peace-loving yajamana into the yajna fire for the highest yajna of the fourth (turiya) order where the libations ultimately reach, from there the Vaidic voices and the blessings of yajna come and reach us. 
1289 :Savita, lord creator, clothed in sun-rays, radiating the golden-green emanations (waves) of light is the light that arose at the dawn of creation. Lord omniscient, protector and sustainer, He goes on and on watching the worlds of existence. 
1290 :In His creation, the man of science too goes on watching and watching, collecting the endless light of knowledge about the worlds of the universe. 
1291 :This sun, traversing like a divine car, remains in the midst of the regions of light and illuminates the heaven, the earth and the sky. It is the sustainer of the world, source treasure of waters, and watches and illuminates before, after and in-between (past, present and future). 
1292 :The sun, seminal fertilizer of life, ocean of spatial waters, scarlet red at dawn, lord of manifold splendour, illuminator of the firmament, sustained in the midst of heaven, travels in space sustaining and binding the ends of the spheres and moving towards the womb of its original mother, eternal energy, from whence it came into being. 
1293 :Wider than oceans of space, supreme over the commanding and blissful powers of existence, lord sustainer of the universal energies and nourishments, lord ordainer of the truth and reality of the world and Himself the supreme reality, all the voices of nature, humanity and divinity celebrate the only one omnipotent sovereign power, Indra. 
1294 :Yajna is the divine power which calls forth the noblest powers and people to the congregation. May it raise the voice of truth and give us the divine message and save us from untruth. Yajna stimulates life with pleasure and well-being. May it inspire us with pleasure and well-being. The fire of yajna and the lord of light feeds the powers of nature. May it augment and enrich the treasures of the environment and bless us with the same divine gifts. 
1295 :May Indra, lord creator of nourishment and energy and giver of knowledge, elevate me to the heights of virtue with inspiration and ambition. And may he, for me, devalue the negative forces of jealousy and enmity with depression to the lowest depths towards elimination. 
1296 :Udgrabhaih ca nigrabham ca brahma deva' avlvrdhan. Adha sapatnanindragm me visuclnan vyasyatam. 
1297 :May the powers of life strengthen and expand our capacity to rise high, and our capability to resist depression toward the fall. And may Indra, divine power, and Agni, divine light, throw out far off our dispersive tendencies and our jealousies and enmities. 
1298 :By virtue of Agni, lord of knowledge, light and energy, act and rise to the heights of joy, holding the gifts of yajna in your hands. In the company of the noblest people, favoured by the generous powers of nature, reach the heavens of bliss and establish yourselves in the regions of light. 
1299 :Agni, man of knowledge and power, go ahead and move eastward to the rising sun. In front of Agni, lord of light and power, be agni yourself, a brilliant man of the front rank here and now. Shine, and around yourself illuminate the environment and create food and energy for our fellow humans and our animals. 
1300 :(With the knowledge of science and the discipline of yoga) I rise from the earth to the skies. From the skies, I rise to the regions of light, the sun. From the regions of the sun, lord of life and joy, I rise to the heavens, the regions of eternal bliss and light divine. 
1301 :Those virtuous men of knowledge who perform yajna and expand it, yajna which sustains the whole world, they expect nothing of the material world and, through yoga, rise above the earth and heaven and ascend to the regions of bliss and light divine. 
1302 :Agni, man of knowledge and yajna, you are the first among men on way to godliness. You are the eye for the average humans as you have the vision of the men of divinity. 
1303 :May the people of faith and love full of devotion dedicated to yajna and performing yajna with men of knowledge and vision of divinity enjoy peace and happiness and ascend to the heaven of bliss and life divine. 
1304 :Just as the mother and the nurse, different of character and status but of equal mind and common purpose, nurse one baby, so do the night and dawn, different in form as darkness and light but harmonious and equal of purpose, nurse one new born, the sun, Agni. The brilliant sun blazes between the earth and heaven as the source of light and symbol of cosmic yajna. Dedicated people who offer libations of holy materials sustain the yajna fire in honour of cosmic Agni for light and nourishment. 
1305 :Agni, lord of a thousand eyes and hundred heads, hundred fold are your pranic energies of life, thousandfold are your energies of action and volition in living beings and in nature. Thousand-fold is the wealth of the world you create and govern. To this generous lord of life and energy we offer our homage with libations into the fire with total dedication, without reservation. 
1306 :Agni, lord of light and life, magnanimous of nature, settle on the face of the earth and bless it with life. Fill the sky with light. Illuminate the heaven with light and glory. Enrich the directions of space with life and splendour. 
1307 :Agni, lord of light and life, invoked and invited in yajna, splendid and gracious in form, come and settle in your own seat in front, in the east. The yajamana and all the noble souls may sit and grace this home now as well as later. May Agni shower divine grace upon us, the yajamana, and all the noble souls in this life and hereafter. 
1308 :I dedicate myself to this chosen Lord Savita’s rich, generous and wonderful divine intelligence which gives a thousand showers of universal knowledge and which the man of vision distils from the mother knowledge of the Vedas just like milk from the great mother cow. 
1309 :Agni, supreme of manifestation in the highest region of existence, we honour and worship you. In this world, in this home, this side of that supreme region we celebrate and worship you. The place you emerge from, and the state whence you arise, we sanctify and love to join. And when you are ablaze in flames of glory, we offer fragrant libations in honour and homage to you. 
1310 :Agni, brilliant and most youthful power, arise in flames and blaze with incessant waves of light right in front of us. And may a perpetual line of worshipful devotees and a continuous flow of fragrant food come to you in homage. 
1311 :Agni, like a beautiful horse, like a darling ambition nursed in the heart, like a blissful yajna sustained with holy chants, we celebrate you in the fire and perpetuate you with homage, and we pray we too may advance in life and virtue. 
1312 :With concentrated mind and thought I offer homage to Agni with libations in the fire, so that the noblest people, lovers of yajna and promoters of truth, come here (and join in homage for advancement. And in company) every day I offer sacred and intrepidable libations of havi to Vishvakarma, lord maker and sustainer of the great good universe. 
1313 :fuel) whereby you rise and shine. Seven are your tongues of flame whereby you devour the food. Seven are the Rishis, visionaries of knowledge and piety who invoke you for homage. Seven are your darling places, contexts, wherein you love to shine and play. Seven are the priests who seven-ways do homage and seven-fold extend your blessings. Seven are the places, vedis, where from you manifest and grow. Fill all these places with ghee and your blessings, grow and prosper and let us too grow and prosper. This is the divine voice. 
1314 :Lord of pure light, and lord of wondrous light, and lord of the light of truth, and lord of light and the lord light itself, lord pure and immaculate, and the lord protector of truth, the Law and the cosmic yajna of existence and the lord sinless of infinite virtue is He. 
1315 :(May the Maruts, heroes of the speed of lightning, grace our yajna). 
1316 :Men of single vision, men of others’ (objective) vision, men of comprehensive vision, men of discreet vision, men of measure, men measured around by all, and men who support and sustain all — they are the men, they are the Maruts who succeed at top speed. 
1317 :The man of the knowledge of truth and law, the man of reality dedicated to truth, the man stable and steadfast, the man support-column of the stable and steadfast, the man who bears and forbears, the man who bears and forbears the variety of reality, and the man of versatility who faces all and bears all in a variety of ways — this man is one of the Maruts who move at top speed. 
1318 :The man master of the Law and reality, master of the truth of reality, master of his forces, the man with close friends around and the man whose enemies are few and far — this is the man, one of the Maruts, who wins at top speed, with his comrades. 
1319 :Men of this character and vision, men of similar character and vision, men of comprehensive character and vision, men of equal character and vision for everyone, men of balanced mind and men of definiteness and ascertainment in all matters — these are the Maruts among humanity who may, to-day, come and join this yajna of ours. 
1320 :The man inherently valiant and firmly rooted, who maintains good health with nourishments, who endures and gives a hot pursuit to the enemy, who is dedicated to the home, who loves sports, is powerful, and who is ambitious to win, such a man is Marut, a live wire. May the Maruts join our yajna. 
1321 :The noble scholars of virtue and wisdom, the distinguished citizens and the smartest warriors should follow Indra, in the manner in which all noble scholars, noble citizens and smart warriors ought to follow Indra, the ruler of the land. 
1322 :All the noble scholars, noble citizens and the smartest warriors should follow Indra, the ruler of the universe. 
1323 :Similarly all the noble scholars, distinguished citizens and the average people should follow this yajamana. 
1324 :(The ruler too should act and behave in a noble manner so that all the noble scholars, distinguished citizens and the average people follow him spontaneously and faithfully.) Agni, lord of light and power, in the midst of this world, drink of this nature’s motherly breast of energy replete with the nectar of life. Foremost among the fastest heroes, drink deep at this fountain head of honey- sweets. Enter this oceanic house of yajna, (expand and go round the world). 
1325 :I wish to mix and go deep into water/ghee for offering it into the fire. Fire arises from water/ghee, which is its birth-place. It is latent in water/ghee. Water/ ghee is its place of rest. Prepare the materials for the libation and call up Agni. Generous power of rain shower, prepare the materials for the offering and make us all rejoice. (The indication is to prepare the waters and produce fire/energy from this rich source.) Honey waves of energy arise from the sea/vedi and, mixing with the rays of the sun, ascend to a state of divine vitality. These rising waves are tongues of the gods (divine powers of nature), and the central birthplace of nectar. These are the mystical names of the mysterious but still scientific powers of ghrta/the sea through the process of yajna. 
1326 :In this yajna we chant and meditate upon the mystical name of ‘yajna’, of ghee, waters and the spirit of fertility, and with all reverence, salutations, faith and holy offerings, observe, perform and internalize yajna as name and as the creative act that it is. May Brahma, the presiding priest, man of the Vedas and generous teacher, hear the celebrated name and expound its meaning and value to others. 
1327 :(i). Yajna is a purusha, a living person, a metaphor. Just as a person is a living human being, and he/she has a name which is identical with the person, so is yajna, a living act and a name, and the name-word is identical with the act. (1) This person, the living act of yajna, has four heads, the four Vedas. It has three legs/sessions: morning, mid-day and evening. It has two heads, the prayaniya ceremony (inauguration), and the udayaniya ceremony (valediction or conclusion). It has seven arms in the form of seven chhandas, gayatri and other metres. It is tied three-ways, structured in three parts: Mantra, the original vedic texts, Brahmana, expositions containing rules and explanations, and kalpa, rules of ritual performance. It is Vrishabha, that which showers joy and prosperity. It roars with the voice of the Vedas. It is great, it is brilliant and divine, and it is seated in the deepest layers of the human mind. 
1328 :(ii). Now the name ‘Yajna’, the word in language: It has four heads: Nama, nouns or substantives, Akhyata, the roots and verbs, Upasarga, the affixes, and Nipata, particles, indeclinables and irregulars. It has three legs: past, present and future tenses. It has two heads: the eternal Word and the structured words of language in use, and the word and its meaning (signification). It has seven arms: the seven cases and case endings or case forms. It is tied three ways: in the mind/intellect, in the chest, and in the throat/mouth. It is a Vrishabha, it showers the thoughts and emotions in communication, and it roars through the medium of sound. It is great, it is rich and brilliant and it is seated in the deepest layers of the human mind. 
1329 :(This mantra gives a comprehensive abstract of the linguistic structure of any language, and on the basis of this abstract a universal grammar of human language, any form of it, can be written.) The mystique of yajna/ghee/waters, three-way hidden and three-way studied in quietude by knowledgeable people, the visionaries sought and found it in the cow, the Veda and nature. One was found and revealed by Indra, specialist of electric energy, one by the specialist of solar energy, and one was received from the scholars of the Vedas and enacted with oblations by the devotees of yajna. 
1330 :These waves of cosmic energy, these vibrations of the cosmic boom of the Word, issue from the oceanic depths of the Eternal Mind. In countless streams they flow all round, not even an enemy can deny them. And I, a soul wrapped in golden hue, stand in the midst of these waves like a reed and feel the power and the beatitude blowing through me. 
1331 :These waves of divine energy, vibrations of the divine voice issue forth from yajna and, purified by the mind in faith, flow serene and quiet like streams through the heart within, away from the fluctuations of the outer world, as deer fly away from the fear of a tiger/hunter. 
1332 :The mighty streams of ghrita, waves of cosmic energy and vibrations of yajnic voice, issue forth (from the divine) and flow incessantly (into the universe) as the turbulent streams of a river blown upon by the wind hasten through their course and fall into the sea, or, as a fearless troop of horse breaking through the enemy defences goes forth to victory winning over the field with the speed of its motion in the heat of action. 
1333 :Just like young women of equal mind and pleasing, noble and generous, smiling in festive mood, the streams of ghrita (ghee) flow from all round and join Agni to feed the holy fuel. And Agni, pleased with the offering, blazes with heat and light. 
1334 :So do the waves of energy and the vibrations of the divine voice of yajna meet the dedicated man who happily receives them and shines with the light of knowledge. 
1335 :Just as a lovely maiden dressed in luxurious finery at her wedding goes to meet her groom, so do the streams of ghrita flow from all sides to meet Agni where yajna is performed and soma is generated for the light and energy of life. 
1336 :Powers of Divinity, bless us with creditable praise, plenty of food and drink and knowledge, and victory in the battles of life. Bless us with auspicious and excellent wealths of the world. Carry this yajna of ours to a noble finale. Let the honey streams of ghrita Yajna Purusha, Agni, Lord of the universe, in your domain, under your law and power rests the entire world of existence. In this domain, whatever is contained in the oceans of space, in the splendour of the skies, in the heart, in life, in yajna, to that we may attain. May we have the taste of the honey-sweets of that cosmic yajna, may we have the feel of that universal energy. 
1337 :Vajasca me prasavasca me prayatisca me prasitisca me dhltisca me kratusca me svarasca me slokasca me sravasca me srutisca me jyotisca me svasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1338 :By yajna, by the Grace of God, by virtue of our joint action, by virtue of my own performance: food is mine and energy is mine; prosperity is mine and the way to prosperity is mine; effort is mine and the will to effort is mine; management is mine and preservation is mine; faith is mine and firmness is mine; vision is mine and resolution is mine; freedom is mine and discipline is mine; praise is mine and the tongue is mine; the heard is mine and the spoken is mine; shruti (Veda) is mine and Smriti (law and tradition) is mine; light is mine and illumination is mine; joy is mine and supreme bliss is mine; all these may grow, all these be favourable; all these be auspicious for all, by yajna. 
1339 :Pranasca me ’ panasca me vyanasca me ’ susca me cittarh ca ma’adhitam ca me vak ca me manasca me caksusca me srotram ca me daksasca me balam ca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1340 :By yajna, by the Grace of God, by the blessings and goodwill of the community, and by virtue of my own discipline: my life and the breath of life, the outgoing air and systemic cleansing, the joints and suppleness of the body, my will to live and the spirit of joy, my mind and my memory, my resolution and meditation, my speech and listening, my thought and self-image, my eye and love of direct truth, my ear and search for confirmation, my expertise and my smartness, my strength and prowess, all these may grow, be favourable and auspicious for all, by yajna. 
1341 :Ojasca me sahasca ma ’ atma ca me tanusca me sarma ca me varma ca me’ figani ca me’ sthini ca me paruhsi ca me sarirani ca ma ’ ayusca me jara ca me yajnena kalpantam. 
1342 :My vigour and my power, my victory and my moral courage, my soul and my potential, my body and health, my home and my family, my defence and my weapons, my limbs and their functions, my bones and my blood, my generation and my vitality, the bodies and health of my people, my life and longevity, my old age and self-dependence, all these may grow, be good and auspicious, for me and for all by yajna, observance of Dharma, law and joint and individual discipline. 
1343 :quid q -Rsanfsbr^f q q yqyJ % qidvq qsqqq i|\STqf?q q qqT qf q qfgqr q( q cjRqi qf ■q qfqqt qf q qjqqr qf q s(lp4HI qf q -^gr ^ % qftgqq q ch<rM^IH^ irrfll Jyaisthyam ca ma ’ adhipatycuh ca me manyusca me bhamasca me ’masca me ’mbhasca me jema ca me mahima ca me varima ca me prathima ca me varsima ca me draghima ca me vrddham ca me vrddhisca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1344 :By yajna, joint action and observance of Dharma and law, community and participative discipline of my freedom : my fame and my wealth, my self-rule and my ruler, my passion and my love of peace, my righteous anger and moral discipline, my honour and my sense of justice, my waters and my fruitfulness, my valour and my victories, my grandeur and my reputation, my greatness and my conduct, my expansion and my domain, my seniority and my humility, my loftiness and my depth, my riches and sense of values, my growth and sense of limitations, all these may be strong and firm, grow and be good for me and for all, by yajna. 
1345 :% q#ET q 5bUl qf % q'Wvq ^ qjrf qf q qfmqqtuf q q TpRf ql q qcpt qf q q§rd q^qqnq imu Satyam ca me sraddha ca me jagacca me dhanam ca me visvarh ca me mahasca me krida ca me modasca me jatam ca me janisyamanam ca me suktam ca me sukrtarii ca me yajnena kalpantam. 
1346 :By yajna, Grace of God and observance of Dharma: Truth is mine and the good of all is mine to work for, faith is mine and the reason and basis of faith is mine, the dynamic world is mine and the sense of change is mine, the wealth is mine and the sense of value is mine, all life is mine and all its opportunities are mine, glory is mine and the respect for glory is mine, fun is mine and games are mine, joy of the world is mine and the freedom of liberation is mine, all that is born is mine and I am for it, all that is being created is for me and I am for it, all that will be created will be for me and I shall be for it, all that has been said well is for me and I am for it, all that has been well done is for me and I am for it, all these and all my good words, thoughts and deeds may grow and be firm and favourable for me and for all by virtue of yajna. 
1347 :Rtam ca me’mrtam ca me’yaksmam ca me ’ - namayacca me jlvatusca me dirghayutvam ca me ’ namitram ca me ’ bhayam ca me sukham ca me sayanam ca me susasca me sudinam ca me yajnena kalpantam. 
1348 :my immortal spirit and meditation, my freedom from illness and exercise, my freedom from suffering and my medication, my vitality and tonics, my longevity and yoga, my freedom from enmity and love for all, my freedom from fear and self-confidence, my joy and means of comfort, my sleep and freedom from tension, my beautiful dawn and early prayers, my happy day and good fortune, may all these grow, be firm and favourable for all and for me by yajna, corporate action and the Grace of God. 
1349 :Yanta ca me dharta ca me ksemasca me dhrtisca me visvatn ca me mahasca me samvicca me jhatram ca me susca me prasuca me strain ca me layasca me yajnena kalpantam. 
1350 :My ruler and my observance of the rules, my sustainer and supports, my security and the protector, my constancy and self-protection, my world around and my behaviour, my nobility and noble actions, my awareness and self-knowledge, my field of specialisation and my achievement, my inspiration and initiative, my potency of generation and my children, my agriculture and the farmers, my house and my property, all these may grow, be strong and firm and good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, personal endeavour, corporate action and the Grace of God. 
1351 :Sarh ca me mayasca me priyam ca me ’- nukamasca me kamasca me saumanasasca me bhagasca me dravinam ca me bhadram ca me sreyasca me vasiyasca me yasasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1352 :My peace and well-being, and my comfort and happiness, and my love, and my desire, and my ambition, and the good cheer of my mind, and my dignity, and my wealth, and my worldly good, and my ultimate good, and my advancement, and my honour and glory, may all these grow and be good and auspicious by yajna for all. 
1353 :Urk ca me sunrta ca me payasca me rasasca me ghrtam ca me madhu ca me sagdhisca me sapitisca me krsisca me vrstisca me jaitram ca ma ’audbliidyam ca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1354 :And my food pure and delicious, and my speech true and pleasing, and my milk and drink, and my tonics and herbal essences, and my ghrita and butter, and my honey and sweets, and my food and dessert, and my drinks and dressings, and my farming and special breeding, and the rains for us and the libations, and our man-power and our accomplishments, and our minerals and the tonic roots, may all these grow and be good and firm and auspicious by yajna for all. 
1355 :Rayisca me rayasca me pustain ca me pustisca me vibhu ca me prabhu ca me purriam ca me purnataram ca me kuyavarn ca me’ksitam ca me ’nnam ca me ’ ksucca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1356 :My wealth of knowledge and power of action, my wealth of possessions and all round prosperity, my health and growth, our public health and nourishment, my mental expansion and intellectual growth, my self- mastery and meditation, my fulfilment and its relevance to life, my worldly advancement and philanthropy, my management of damage and pollution of crops, my foods and my delicacies, and our management of hunger and thirst and shortages, may all these grow and be strong and auspicious for all by yajna. 
1357 :Vittam ca me vedyatn ca me bliutam ca me bhavisyacca me sugam ca me supathyam ca ma ’ rddham ca ma ’rddisca me klrptam ca me klrptisca me matisca me sumatisca me yajnena kalpantam. 
1358 :All my thought and whatever I have thought out, all that I know and ought to know, my past and my present, all my future and all my timeless, all my shortcuts and my proper actions, my treatments and my diagnoses, my riches and my achievement, my spiritual wealth and my fulfilments, my intentions and my imaginations, my reflections and my reasons, my understanding and my analyses, my intelligence and my faith and commitments, all these may grow, and be strong and auspicious by yajna for all. 
1359 :Vriliayasca me yavasca me masasca me tilasca me mudgasca me khalvasca me priyahgavasca me ’ navasca me syamakasca me nivarasca me godhumasca me masurasca me yajnena kalpantam. 
1360 :My paddy and rice, and my barley, and my beans, and my sesamums, and my mungo beans, and my legumins, and my long pepper, and my small grains, and my millet, and my wild grains, and my wheat, and my lentils and all other grains, and their preparations, may all these grow in plenty, rich and delicious, by yajna and scientific treatment for all. 
1361 :Asma ca me mrttika ca me girayasca me parx’atasca me sikatasca me vanaspatayasca me hiranyam ca me ’ yasca me syamam ca me loham ca me sisam ca me trapu ca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1362 :Our stones and gems, and our clay and its varieties, and our clouds and crops, and our mountains and hills and valleys, and our sands and pebbles, and our herbs and trees, and our gold and minerals, and our iron and steels, and our sapphires and other gems, and our copper and bronze, and our lead and its varieties, and our zinc and brass, all these may develop by the yajna of scientific treatment and grow good and auspicious for all of us. 
1363 :Agnisca ma’apasca me virudhasca ma’osadli- ayasca me krstapacyasca me ’ krstapacyasca me gramyasca me pasava ’ aranyasca me vittarii ca me vittisca me bhutam ca me bhutisca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1364 :aquatic wealth, and my shrubs and creepers, and my herbs and trees, and my cultivated grains and specialities, and my wild fruits and berries, and my domestic animals and pets, and my wild beasts and animals, and my wealth and dearest possessions, and the sweets and dear forms of my past and present, and my honour and glory and all the efforts required, all these may develop and grow auspicious for all of us, by yajna. 
1365 :Vasu ca me vasatisca me karma ca me saktisca me’ rthasca ma’emasca ma’itya ca me gatisca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1366 :My assets and articles, and my house and community, and my work and workers, and my power and love, and my capital and the subscribers, and my management and knowledge and competence, and my working and technique, and my progress and new ventures, all may develop and grow auspicious by managerial yajna. 
1367 :Agnisca ma ’indrasca me somasca ma ’indrasca me savita ca ma ’indrasca me sarasvati ca ma ’ indrasca me pusa ca ma’indrasca me brh- aspatisca ma ’indrasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1368 :Agni, solar energy and magnetic force of the earth is mine, and Indra, lord controller of power and energy is mine. Soma, nature’s power of rain and generosity is mine, and Indra, lord justice controller of rain and generosity is mine. Savita, power of generation and prosperity is mine, and Indra, lord and controller of generation and prosperity is mine. Saraswati, divine spirit of knowledge, art, and the system of education is mine, and Indra, lord and power controller of the value and application of knowledge is mine. Pusha, power of food and production is mine, and Indra, enlightened controller of good nourishment and production is mine. Brihaspati, great lord of social activity, manners and culture is mine, and Indra, lord controller of social and moral values is mine. May all these powers of nature and society for development, direction and control grow strong and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, social action in unison, enlightened guidance and by the Grace of God. 
1369 :Mitrasca ma ’indrasca me varunasca ma ’indrasca me dhata ca ma’indrasca me tvasta ca ma’ indrasca me marutasca ma indrasca me visve ca me deva ’indrasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1370 :Mitra, my pranic energy of breath and energy of the system, and Indra, my lustre and electric energy; and Varuna, pranic energy of the throat and blood circulation, and Indra, solar energy of sustenance; and Dhata, my controller and ordainer, and Indra, giver of prosperity; and Tvashta, catalytic energy of my system, and my endeavour, and Indra, the breaker of my negative forces and giver of scientific energy; and the Maruts, cosmic wind and body vitality, and Indra, universal energy and its scientific use; and all the powers of nature such as earth and great powers of humanity, and Indra, lord giver of all glory and success; may all these powers grow strong and auspicious for me and for all by yajna, joint action in the service of nature and by the Grace of God. 
1371 :Prtliivi ca ma’indrasca me’ntariksam ca ma’ indrasca me dyausca ma ’indrasca me samasca ma ’indrasca me naksatrani ca ma ’indrasca me disasca ma indrasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1372 :The earth and her fertility, and the power that controls and regulates that fertility; the sky and the riches that exist therein, and the powers that control those riches to shower on the earth; and the regions of light and the energy therein, and the sun that presides over the light; and the yearly rounds of time and its divisions and their effects, and the supreme lord of time; and the stars and planets and their movements with their effects on our environment, and the operative powers of natural law that control the movements; and the directions of space and the currents of wind and energy therein, and the powers that control the weather and the atmosphere; may all these regions of space and heavenly bodies and the operations of mother Prakriti grow strong and firm and be good and auspicious for me and all by yajna, the process of replenishment, renewal and enrichment. 
1373 :Afnsusca me rasmisca me’ dabhyasca me’- dhipatisca ma ’ upamsusca me ’ntaryamasca ma ’ aindravayavasca me maitravarunasca ma’ asvinasca me pratiprasthanasca me sukrasca me mantlii ca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1374 :The pervasive sun and its light, and the foods ripened by the sun rays, the fearless man and the protector of the law-abiding, and the presiding power and the office thereof, and my holy-chant in meditation and concentration on the secrets of mysteries, my midbreath and inner strength, my vital heat that controls the winds and electric currents of the body system and the water, the pranic vitality related to prana and udana (breath and the upper motions of energy wind), and the inner light between the solar and the lunar plexi and its effects on health, and the energy for movement and my movements, and my purity of mind and vital energy, and my churner and dairy foods and apparatuses, may all these grow strong and be good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna. 
1375 :Agrayanasca me vaisvadevasca me dhruvasca me vaisvanarasca ma aindragnasca me mahavaisvadevasca me mar utv atlyase a me niskevalyasca me savitrasca me sarasvatasca me patnivatasca me hariyojanasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1376 :My special yajna of the month of Margashirsha, and my guests of this noble assembly at the yajna, and my settled behaviour and universal hospitality and reverence, and my yajna for the development of wind and fire energy, and my reverence for the noblest people of the world, and my dedication to the yajna of the liberation stage of yoga, and my yajna for solar energy, and my dedication to the eminent scholars of science and literature, and my love and regard for the married couples, and my travels, transport and transporters, may all these grow and be good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna. 
1377 :Srucasca me camasasca me vayavyani ca me dronakalasasca me gravanasca me’dhisavane ca me putabhrcca ma ’adhavamyasca me vedisca me barhisca me ’vabhrthasca me svagakarasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1378 :My ladles and their cleaning, my bowls and their contents, my aerial apparatuses and their maintenance and function, and my soma vessels, and my urns and jugs, and my stone presses and mortars and pestles, and my handpress and the soma plants, and my urns of pure soma, and the vessels for clearing and filtering soma, and the yajna altar, and my holy grass and the feather broom, and my holy bath and ablutions, and my valedictory chant of joy at the completion of yajna : may all these grow and be good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna. 
1379 :Agnisca me gharmasca me’rkasca me suryasca me pranasca me’svamedhasca me prthivi ca me ’ditisca me ditisca me dyausca me ’hgulayah sakvarayo disasca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1380 :My fire and my use of fire, my hymns of worship and the singers, my passion and cool of mind, my sunlight and my warmth of living, my vital breath and air-energy, my nation and its policy and governance, my earth mother and her riches, my ethics and self- control, my imperishable wealth and my earthly life, my spiritual light and my days and nights, my fingers and their hold and my powers and potentials, and my directions and my reach there, all these may grow, be good and auspicious for me and for all by yajna. 
1381 :Vratam ca ma ’rtavasca me tapasca me samvat- sarasca me ’horatre ’urvasthive brhadrathantare ca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1382 :My holy vows and my commitments, and my seasons and my solstices with change of the seasons, and my observance of Dharma and my practice of yoga, and my yearly rounds of the sun and the planets and the ages of time, and my days and nights and my daily work and prayers, and my thighs and knees, and my grandeur and nobility, and my heavenly lights and spaces and the cosmic periods, may all these grow by days and nights by yajna, and may all these be good and auspicious for me and for all. 
1383 :Eka ca me tisrasca me tisrasca me pahca ca me pahca ca me sapta ca me sapta ca me nova ca me nova ca ma ’ekadasa ca ma ’ekadasa ca me trayodasa ca me trayodasa ca me pahcadasa ca me pahcadasa ca me saptadasa ca me saptadasa ca me navadasa ca me navadasa ca ma ’ ekavifnsatisca ma’ekavimsatisca me trayo- vimsatisca me trayovimsatisca me pahca- vimsatisca me pahcavimsatisca me sapta- vimsatisca me saptavimsatisca me nava- vimsatisca me navavimsatisca ma ’ekatrimsacca ma’ ekatrimsacca me trayastrimsacca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1384 :By yajna, the process of addition and collection, may the numbers increase and be good and auspicious for me and for all: One is mine and unity is mine. (And one and one becomes two, and one plus two becomes three. In this way, in this progression) three is mine, and three is mine, and five is mine, and five is mine, and seven is mine, and seven is mine, and nine is mine, and nine is mine, and eleven is mine, and eleven is mine, and thirteen is mine, and thirteen is mine, ‘ and fifteen is mine, and fifteen is mine, and seventeen is mine, and seventeen is mine, and nineteen is mine and nineteen is mine, and twenty one is mine, and twenty one is mine, and twenty three is mine, and twenty three is mine, and twenty five is mine, and twenty five is mine, and twenty seven is mine, and twenty seven is mine, and twenty nine is mine, and twenty nine is mine, and thirty one is mine, and thirty one is mine, and thirty three is mine, and so on the numbers may increase and be good and auspicious for me and for all by the process of yajna in progression till infinity. 
1385 :yajna which also means ‘dana’, giving away, we have the progression in the reverse direction by subtraction. The meaning of the mantra then would be: Thirty-three is mine, give away two and thirty one is mine, thirtyone is mine, minus two, twenty nine is mine and so on. 
1386 :In the same way, by implication, we can work out the process of multiplication, and division and the process of squaring and cubing and square-root, etc. Further, we can move from arithmetic to algebra and other branches of mathematics. 
1387 :Catasrasca me ’stau ca me ’stau ca me dvadasa ca me dvadasa ca me sodasa ca me sodasa ca me vimsatisca me vimsatisca me caturvimsatisca me caturvimsatisca me ’stavimsatisca me’- stavimsatisca me dvatrimscca me dvatrimsacca me sattrifnsacca me sattrifnsacca me catva- rimsacca me catvarifnsacca me catuscatvarim- sacca me catuscatvarimscca me’ stacatvarim- sacca me yajhena kalpantam. 
1388 :By yajna, the process of addition and collection, may the numbers increase and be good and auspicious Four is mine, and four is mine, eight is mine. Eight is mine, and four, twelve is mine. Twelve is mine, plus four, sixteen is mine. Sixteen is mine, add four, and twenty is mine. Twenty is mine, and twenty four is mine. Twenty four is mine, and twenty eight is mine. Twenty eight is mine and thirty two is mine. Thirty two is mine, and thirty six is mine. Thirty six is mine, and forty is mine. Forty is mine, and forty four is mine. Forty four is mine, and forth eight is mine. And so on the numbers may increase till infinity by yajna, for me and for all for the good of life and joy. 
1389 :Also: By implication, the mantra can be applied to the process of yajna by ‘dana’, gifting away, subtraction, by four, from forty-eight down to four and so on. 
1390 :The mantra can also be applied to the process of multiplication. In fact, the mantra itself gives the multiplication table upto twelve times four and so on. 
1391 :So too the mantra may be interpreted as showing the process of division since it gives a table of the division of forty eight by four upto twelve times. 
1392 :Tryavisca me tryavi ca me dityavat ca me dityauhi ca me pahcavisca me pahcavi ca me trivatsasca me trivatsa ca me turyavdt ca me turyauhi ca me yajhena kalpantdm. 
1393 :By yajna, veterinary science and the science of animal husbandry: My man of three breeds of sheep and their maintenance, the woman of three breeds of sheep and their milk, etc., the man in-charge of damage control and his knowledge, and the woman in-charge of maintenance against damage and her stores, and the man of five grades of sheep and his staff, and the woman of five grades of sheep and her assistants, the man of three breeds of calf and his knowledge, and the woman of three breeds of calf and her knowledge, the bull of the fourth year of age and its training and maintenance, and the cow of the fourth year of age and its maintenance, may all these grow in number and quality and be good and auspicious for me and for all. 
1394 :Pasthavat ca me pasthauhi ca ma ’uksa ca me vasa ca ma’ rsabhasca me vehacca me’- nadvahsca me dhenusca me yajnena kalpantdm. 
1395 :And my beasts of burden both male and female and the articles and materials for trade and transport, and my virile bull and my infertile cow, and my strong bull and my miscarrying cow, and my bullock and my milch cow, may all these grow by the yajna of animal husbandry and veterinary science and may all these be good and auspicious for me and for all. 
1396 :For the warrior and the battle, all hail and honest action! For progress and prosperity, virtuous living and hard work! For acceptance and acclaim, commendable action! For knowledge and practical application, dedication and meditation! For housing and settlement, work, money and materials. For the lord of the day, knowledge of time and chronology. For the day- bewildered and lost, sympathetic action. For the misguided and destructive, proper counselling. For the man settled but on way to destruction, forceful voice of truth. For the lowest and meanest man of the world, strongest counselling. For Lord of the universe, hymns of praise and worship. For the protector of the world, correct knowledge. For the protector of the nation, correct policy. For the protector of the people, correct knowledge of Raj Dharma. This is your brilliance of governance. You are generous, selfless guide and controller of your friends. We accept, respect and admire you for your prowess and action, showers of favours, the support and sustenance of the people, and for the government of the people. 
1397 :Ayuryajhena kalpatam prdno yajhena kalpatam caksur yajhena kalpatam srotram yajhena kalpatam vag yajhena kalpatam mano yajhena kalpatamatma yajhena kalpatam brahma yajhena kalpatam jyotiryajhena kalpatam svaryajhena kalpataih prstham yajahena kalpatam yajho yajhena kalpatam. Stomasca yajusca ’rk ca sama ca brhacca rathantaram ca. Svardeva’ aganmamrta’abhuma prajapateh praja ’abhuma vet svaha. 
1398 :Man of the yajna of governance, to accomplish your task, may health and age grow by yajna, may pranic energy grow by yajna, may the eye and vision grow by yajna, may the ear and information grow by yajna, may the tongue and communication grow by yajna, may the mind and morale and national confidence grow by yajna, may the soul grow strong by yajna, may the man of universal knowledge and the sense of higher values grow by yajna, may the light of justice and wisdom grow by yajna, may comfort and joy grow by yajna, may the questions, heights and foundations of life grow by yajna, may the yajna of Dharma grow by the yajna, pursuit of Dharma, may the hymns of praise and celebration of the Divine, the Yajus, the Riks, and the Samans, the Brihat Sama and Rathantara Sama also grow by yajna. May the noble people attain to the eternal joy of immortality. May we all attain to you and immortality. May we all be the children of the Lord and father of the universe by the truth of word and deed. 
1399 :Vajasya nu prasave mataram mahimaditim nama vacasa karamahe. Yasyamidam visvarh bhuv anamavive s a tasyarh no devah savita dharma savisat. 
1400 :In this Lord Omnipotent’s yajna of life and sustenance, we celebrate with holy songs of Divinity, the Veda, the great inviolable Mother Nature in whom reside the entire worlds of existence. May Savita, lord creator and generator of life strengthen and promote our Dharma in the lap of the mother within the Law. 
1401 :May all the airs and winds come to us. May all the powers of protection and promotion, all the noblest people of the world, come to us with all the means of protection and advancement. May all the fires of life’s yajna light and shine for us. May the entire wealth of the world, food and energy be available to us by the Grace of Savita. 
1402 :May our food and energy, power and prosperity, spread over the seven regions of the world, and may it extend even beyond in all the four directions. And may our power and knowledge, with the noblest people of the world, guide and protect us here in the acquisition and distribution of the wealth of life. 
1403 :It is food, energy, power, wealth, which inspires us to give in charity. With the seasons, according to need, it feeds the powers of nature and humanity. It is food and energy which produces and promotes our children and young people. By virtue of the same food and power, may I, producer and promoter of food, energy and wealth, attain all my hopes to fruition in all directions. 
1404 :Food with oblations in yajna takes us forward in the beginning and in the middle of home life. With oblations it feeds and enriches the powers of nature and the noblest people too. It is food which blesses me with the best and the bravest powers and people everywhere. I pray I may be the producer, promoter and protector of food in all directions and realize all my hopes and ambitions. 
1405 :Agni, I invigorate and enrich myself with the milk and juices of the earth. I invigorate and enrich myself with the waters and herbs of the earth. So I invigorate and enrich myself with food and energy. 
1406 :Agni, man of medicinal herbs and juices, take on, hold on to, the juices and tonics in the earth, in the herbs, in the regions of light and in the sky and study them. And may all the worlds and directions of space be full of juices and tonics for me too. 
1407 :In this socio-political yajna of the land in Lord Savita’s creation, I in-vest you with the power and presidency of Agni, the Ruler, and consecrate you with the arms of Ashvinis (the heat and passion of the sun and the peace and cool of the moon) and the hands of Pusha (power of the nation’s sustenance with the positive and negative current’s of the systemic circuit). I vest in you the constitution of the sovereign nation and sanctify you with the voice of the people in the service of Sarasvati, the wisdom and culture of humanity. 
1408 :Agni, Lord of the earth and defender of the land, observes truth, defends the truth, and abides in the truth. His pleasure and joy is the herbs which grow and play in the waters like water nymphs. May he protect and promote our Brahma system of education and knowledge, and our Kshatra system of defence and administration. Homage to him in love and reverence. All hail and care for the herbs and waters! Surrounded by lights and joining day and night, that lord of universal peace and celebrated in all the Sama hymns, the sun, is the lord sustainer of the earth. His pleasure and joy is the rays of light which play and exult in the sky joining and disjoining things in space. May he protect and promote our Brahma system of light and education. May he protect and promote our Kshatra system of defence and administration. Homage to him in truth and faith! All hail and love to the rays of the sun! Susumnah suryarasmiscandrama gandharva- stasya naksatranyapsaraso bhekurayo nama. Sa na ’idaih brahma ksatram patu tasmai svaha vat tabhyah svaha. 
1409 :The moon, blissful at heart and blest by the sun- rays with light, is the lord sustainer of the earth. May he sustain and promote our Brahma system of peace and education. May he sustain and promote our Kshatra system of law and administration. His pleasure and joy surely is the rays of light which play and exult with the planets and satellites. Homage to him! Homage to his rays, to light! Isiro visvavyaca vato gandharvastasyapo apsarasa urjo nama. Sa na idaih brahma ksatram patu tasmai saha vat tabhyah svaha. 
1410 :The wind, fast in motion and pervading the whole world, is the lord and sustainer of the earth. His pleasure and joy is the waters which, for sure, create energy. May he sustain and inspire our Brahma system of education and advancement. May he sustain and excite our Kshatra system of defence and expansion. Homage to him! Homage to his waves of waters and energy! Yajna, creator and giver of joy and prosperity, health and nourishment, is the sustainer of the earth, cows and the Word of the Vedas. His pleasure and joy is the gifts for the priests and the devotees and the bliss of the holy chants which play around in ecstasy. May the yajna sustain and promote our Brahma system of knowledge and generosity of light and creativity. May yajna sustain and advance our Kshatra system of defence and development. Homage and libations for yajna! Homage and libations for charity and holy chants! Prajapatirvisvakarma mano gandharvastasya ’ rksamanyapsarasa’estayo nama. Sa na idam brahma ksatram patu tasmai svaha vat tabhyah svaha. 
1411 :Father and guardian of His children, lord maker of the universe, universal Mind, Vishvakarma is the sustainer of the earth and master of universal knowledge, the Veda. Riks and Samans, Vedas, are the vibrations of His omniscience ever on the move across space which are the love and desire of the devotees. May He protect and promote our Brahma system of education and scientific yajna, and our Kshatra system of enlightened and modern administration and defence. Homage and libations to Him! Homage and libations for the divine voice of the Veda! Sa no bhuvanasya pate prajapate yasya ta ’upari grha yasya veha. Asmai brahmane’smai ksatraya mahi sarma yaccha svaha. 
1412 :Father guardian of your children, lord protector of the world, all your homes and habitations up above, and all your homes and householders down here, bless them all. Bless our Brahma system of education and enlightenment and our Kshatra system of administration and employment with good homes and great peace and joy. Homage and libations to the Lord! Prajapati, father and guardian of creation, vast and deep as the ocean, oceans roll around in you. Lord of spaces and spatial waters, showering the earth with rain and the mind with virtue, you are peace yourself and the giver of peace, bliss yourself and the giver of bliss. Come and fold me into bliss all round. 
1413 :Tempestuous lord of the winds, lord of the stormy scholars of the world, you are goodness yourself and the giver of universal good. You are prosperity and joy yourself and the giver of universal joy and prosperity. Come and fold me into the tempestuous storm of knowledge and discovery all round. 
1414 :You are the supreme lord of protection and universal help. You are both lord and object of honour and worship, peace and joy yourself and the giver of joy and total freedom. Come and fold me into the bliss of worship and acceptance all round. 
1415 :Agni, lord of the universe, that beauty, light and love of yours which shines in the sun and fills the heavens and all other spaces of the world with its rays, with all those rays of light and beauty and all those vibrations of love, bless us today for the people and their love. 
1416 :Brihaspati, lord of the great wonderful world, brilliant powers of divinity, saints and sages, that light and love of yours which shines in the sun, and that which reflects in the sun-beams, the earths, fires, sense organs, cows and horses, with all that light and love, may Indra, lord of universal energy, and Agni, power of universal heat and light, and the saints and scholars of the world bless us. 
1417 :Brihaspati, lord of the universe, eminent teacher and master of vast knowledge, inspire our Brahma section of the community—scholars, scientists, teachers and researchers with brilliance and love. Infuse brilliance, love and justice into our Kshatrias, defence, administration and justice section of the community. 
1418 :Bless with light, love and generosity our Vaishyas, producers and distributors among the community. And bless our Shudras, the ancillary services, with light, love and loyalty. Bless me with light and love toward us all. 
1419 :The yajamana, singing Vedic hymns of praise in honour of the lord, offers libations of fragrant materials with absolute dedication in the hope of self-fulfilment. The same I come to you, Varuna, Lord of our love and choice, universally worshipped and celebrated. Here I am at your door. Kind and favourable lord, know, accept and enlighten us, let not life slip through our fingers into the sands of time. 
1420 :Warmth is heavenly, soothing, use it well, for yajna. Fire is heavenly, generous, use it well, for yajna. Air is heavenly, energy, use it well, for yajna. Light is heavenly, power, use it well, for yajna. Sun is heavenly, life, miss it not, use it well, for yajna. 
1421 :I feed the fire with powerful oblations of ghee, fire which is divine power and sustainer of life, feeding on food and growing higher, mightier and more and more pervasive. And thereby, desiring and increasing the joys of life, may we rise to the regions of the illustrious lord of light, the sun, and ultimately attain to the highest level of bliss, the freedom and ecstasy of Moksha, beyond all suffering. 
1422 :Agni, lord of light and life, cause and effect, consumption of food and creation/production of energy and new forms, these are the two wings, ever young, constant, and never decaying, of your systemic catalysis in the process of evolution and development, by which you negate the forces of counter-evolution and destruction. By virtue of these two, may we rise to the regions of the noble heroes of action to which arose the visionary seers first-born and ancient. 
1423 :Cool as the moon, versatile and brave, fast as an eagle, committed to truth and law, powerful and brilliant, generous as the sun, great, steadfast, firmly seated in this house of the nation, salutations to you. Forbear, do not violate me, do not injure me. 
1424 :Brilliant man of peace and power, you are on top of the light of knowledge, at the centre of the life on earth, the essence of waters and herbs, life of life, shelter home for all, celebrated through the land, guide, path and destination for all. Salutations and homage to you! Brilliant power of light and life, you are on top of the world, steadfast and presiding over all! Your heart is deep in infinity. Your energy is one with universality. Break through the oceans of space and hold the waters of life for gift. And then, protect and promote us with the rain of light from heaven, showers from the clouds and the sky, and honey sweets from the earth. 
1425 :Yajna, wealth and power of the world, source of benediction and fulfilment, loved and performed by top scientists and scholars of the highest order, come and bring us here and now all that we love and all that we desire. 
1426 :May Agni, invoked and fed with love and fragrant materials, protect and promote us with the desired comfort and joy. And may this food and homage which comes to its own reach the noblest powers of nature and humanity. 
1427 :Lovers of truth and action, whatever you have thought and imagined and whatever has issued forth from your intention or heart or mind or from your actual experience of the eye, and whatever stays held up within, follow that and achieve, and rise to the heavenly regions of the meritorious to which arose the divine visionaries first born and ancient. 
1428 :Etam sadhastha pari te dadami yamavahacche- vadhim jdtaveddh. Anvaganta yajnapatirvo ’ atra tam sma jdnita parame vyoman. 
1429 :of yajna, I pass on to you this supreme treasure of knowledge and joy which Jataveda, Agni, and the devoted scholar of the Veda brought down hitherward from the highest heavens, and to which the yajamana also attains following upon the yajna. Know him, and know and experience that supreme presence and that supreme joy which abides in the highest heavens. 
1430 :Lovers of Divinity, noblest scholars and sages, sitting together in this heavenly home of yajna, know and realise this supreme creative presence which pervades the highest and the ultimate spaces of the universe. Realise its form and power, and feel the bliss that emanates from this presence. Perform the acts and observe the devotions prescribed by the Vedas and the Vedic Traditions for the attainment of this presence which comes to those who travel by the paths followed by the godly men and women of divinity. 
1431 :Agni, fire and power of light and life, man of fire and knowledge, awake, arise, and let the yajamana arise and act. And both of you together enact the holy rites and offer the devotions to the Lord. Men and women of divinity and the yajamana, all be seated in this blessed house of yajna on the holy seats around the vedi. 
1432 :Lord of fire and knowledge, by the power you conduct the yajna of a hundred gifts, and the yajna of total Vedic knowledge, and all the worldly wealth, by the same power lead on this yajna of ours to reach the regions of bliss among the noblest souls of divinity. 
1433 :Lord of yajna, by the sacrificial seat (asana), vedi’s girdle of fire-sticks, the ladle, the vedi, the kusha grass and the light of fire, and by the chant of Vedic hymns, take our yajna on and forward to lead us to reach the joy of life and the bliss of divinity among the blessed souls. 
1434 :Whatever is given, whatever is received from others for others, whatever works are raised for charity, whatever gifts are given to priests, may versatile Agni of universal action carry all that to the heavenly powers in the regions of bliss for our sake. 
1435 :Where streams of nectar honey flow uninterrupted and where flow streams of purest milk and ghee, there among the noblest souls, may Agni, lord of universal yajnic action, lead us into the heaven of bliss. 
1436 :I am fire, so by birth, present in all that is born. Ghee is my light of the eye. Nectar is my mouth. What I consume turns into nectar. Loved and adored with Riks, Yajus and Samans, I am threefold in constitution, my elements being akasha (ether), vayu (wind and energy), and agni, fire that I am. I pervade and cover the sky, I am perpetually active and moving. I am the heat and light of the sun and summer. I am havi, the food of yajna, and I am a name, I have an identity of my own. 
1437 :I am Riks by name (Rigveda), I am Yajus, that’s my name (Yajurveda), I am Samans, that’s my name (Samveda) for sure. 
1438 :Yajnagni, five are the sacred fires that are on this earth (namely, Anvaharya-pachana or Dakshina, Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, Sabhya, and Avasthya), which are good and auspicious for all the people without discrimination. Of them, you are the supreme. Awake, arise, come and inspire us for a full life on earth, dedicated to yajna. 
1439 :Indra, lord of blazing power and prowess, for your power to break down the anti-life clouds of darkness, for the sake of strength and superiority in advancement, and for your potential to rout the forces of the enemies of humanity, we turn to you, abide by you and act under your command. 
1440 :Indra, lord of lightning power, disarm, wither and crush the rival negative forces, lurking within, mischievous, growing, vociferous, and like the cloud, withholding the waters of progress. Indra, blazing with the thunderbolt like the sun, break up the cloud and destroy the mischief with your might. 
1441 :Indra, lord of might in command, eliminate the battles of blood. Take them down to those who rise with violent force and come upon us to fight. Whoever wish to enslave us, take them down to utter darkness of misery. 
1442 :Like a terrible lion of the mountain forest, roaming around freely, go far and fall upon the hostile forces. Having tempered and sharpened the point of your steel, drive off the enemies and eliminate the battles of blood. 
1443 :All commanding power, reaching everything and everyone like the light of the sun and the heat of fire, come to us from afar for our protection. Fire of life, listen to our songs of praise and prayer and come. 
1444 :Prsto divi prsto’ agnih prthivyam prsto visva ’osadhiravivesa. Vaisvanarah sahasa prsto’ agnih sa no diva sa risaspatu naktam. 
1445 :Agni, universal fire, Vaishvanara, omnipresent, omnificent vitality, which blazes in heaven as the sun is worth knowing. The fire in the earth is worth knowing. The fire that has entered the entire herbs and trees of the world is worth knowing by research. May this Agni protect and sustain us against violence day and night. 
1446 :Agni, lord defender, protector and sustainer, under your umbrella, may we get the benefits we desire. Lord of wealth and plenty, may we get the wealth and the valorous heroes we need. Fighting the battles of life, may we achieve the victories we prize. Lord ever young, unageing, may we also share and achieve your imperishable glory and majesty. 
1447 :Agni, lord of light, knowledge and power, with hands raised up in homage, we come to you today with a dedicated, concentrated, thoughtful and faithful mind and make the loved-most offerings. With the same dedicated, concentrated and committed mind,you too do honour to the powers of divinity. 
1448 :Agni, lord protector of regions and places, lord of knowledge, Indra, lord of power and honour, Brahma, lord of creative Vedic vision, Deva, lord of generosity and brilliance, Brihaspati, lord of learning and teaching, may all these and other noble powers of the world, enlightened and magnanimous, protect and promote our yajnas of life for the good of all for ever and onward. 
1449 :Lord of life and humanity, ever young, generous giver, listen to the voice and prayers of the people. Protect and promote humanity, and preserve the race with the breath of life. 
1450 :Tonic of life, panacea for health, delicious in taste, sharp in action, honey sweet and healing like nectar, I mix and develop you with soma, delicious sharp, honey sweet and nectar-like in healing. Integrated with soma, you are now soma itself. Mature and ripen for the Ashvins, powers of health and men and women of learning. Ripen and mature for Sarasvati, woman of the divine voice. Mature and ripen for Indra, man of power and honour who protects and promotes humanity against suffering. 
1451 :Soma, extracted, richly reinforced and distilled thus is the best for life and yajna. Let the best person among humans develop and produce it mixed with the waters and matured on the mountains with the clouds. 
1452 :Soma, freshly extracted, fully filtered, highly refined, and seasoned in westerly wind, instant and usable is a friend of Indra, man of power and honour, for concentration of mind. 
1453 :Soma, old extracted, fully filtered, highly refined, and seasoned in easterly wind, instant and effective is a friend of Indra, man of power and honour, for concentration of mind. 
1454 :Lover and maker of soma, the dawn, daughter of the sun, constantly purifies and vitalizes the streams of your soma with an uninterrupted flow of the currents of its celestial light and eternal energy. 
1455 :Soma, extracted and taken, purifies and energizes the Brahmana community of intellectuals, and the Kshatra community of warriors, defenders and administrators, and inspires them with passion and enthusiasm for action and achievement. It sharpens the senses with sensitivity and the mind with brilliance. 
1456 :Deva, man of science and yajna, with the purity and energy of yajna and soma, please and serve the powers of nature and humanity and enhance the production of food for the yajamana with vital juice treatment. 
1457 :O friend, ruler and administrator, those farmers who produce grain and harvest the crop for strength and sustenance, and those brilliant ones who, accordingly, study, analyse and pronounce their judgement on food production, for all these provide food and maintenance. 
1458 :Accepted and sanctified you are for the Ashvins, earth and sunlight (for production), scientific knowledge, strength and power and defence and protection. This is your value and justification for life. I consecrate you for splendour, power and prowess, and solid strength. 
1459 :Nana hi vain devahitam sadaskrtam ma safn srksdtham parame vyoman. Surd tvamasi susmini soma’esa ma ma himsih svdm yon imavisanti. 
1460 :Many are the things for you in this wide world. They are different, each in its own place good for the noble people. Don’t confuse one with the other in your own understanding: “You are sura, intoxication. And you are sura, stimulation for life’s energy. This is soma, life’s energy, passion for action, peace and pleasure for the mind. Coming to your own in your own place, don’t violate soma, don’t injure me.” Indra, accepted and initiated you are in the laws of life, vested with splendour of the sun and beauty of the moon, power and prowess of the world on the move, and the thunderbolt of lightning. This world is your home and justification for existence for the experience and creation of joy, spiritual bliss, universal honour and glory. I consecrate you in your place and position by virtue of Soma. 
1461 :You are the light of life, put light into me. You are the vigour and vitality of life, put vigour and vitality into me. You are the strength and force of life, put strength and force into me. You are the lustre of health and energy of life, bless me with the glow and lustre of health and energy. You are the passion for life, put passion into me. You are the challenge and victory of life, bless me with the spirit of challenge and the ambition for victory. 
1462 :That secret agency which watches and keeps off both the tiger and wolf, the eagle and other birds of prey, and the lion, the same may warn and protect this ruler from sin and wrong-doing. 
1463 :Agni, lord of light and yajna, when my child sucks its mother with joy and hugs her almost crushing her with love, then I feel free from my filial debt to nature and my parents, since then are my parents saved through me. 
1464 :Stay one with the parents, with nature and with God. Join me with piety and goodness. Stay away and keep me away from sin and evil. 
1465 :The healing powers of nature and the two Ashvins, positive and negative currents of universal energy, enact the medicinal yajna of evolution in the service of Indra, lord of the universe. So do the physicians, men and women both, holding their mind and senses in order, carry on the yajna of health and healing with their knowledge and advice. (So too should we all work for health and healing in the service of God and humanity.) Blades of grass are symbols of initiation. Shoots of barley are symbols of yajnic inauguration. Roasted rice treated with soma is the symbol of exchange. Honey is the essence of soma plant. Develop these for yajna. 
1466 :Roasted barley and masara drink is the mark of hospitality. Gift of food, drink and clothes is the mark of heroes. Three nights stay is courtesy to the guests. The secret of soma drink is three nights distillation and maturity. Observe these in the hospitality yajna. 
1467 :The juice of soma fully distilled and prepared by the expert physician, mixed with milk and approved and accepted by a learned woman of Vedic knowledge of medicine, matures into a panacea fit to be the favourite tonic for the sophisticated Indra, lord of strength, power and governance. 
1468 :The seat of soma is the mark of governance. The flask of soma drink is the mark of an auspicious altar. Invigorating food is the mark of an auspicious northern altar. The filter that separates the essence of soma from waste is the symbol of a good physician. 
1469 :By vedi and performance of yajna, yajnic land is acquired and sanctified. By yajna seats of grass and noble work, wealth and prosperity is obtained. By the pillar of yajnic celebration and social cooperation, honour and celebrity is achieved. And by the yajna fire and creative work, advancement and honourable leadership is attained. 
1470 :The Ashvinis, husband and wife, prepare the yajna chamber and collect the holy materials. Sarasvati the learned house-wife, is the lady of yajna and the host for the priests and the guests. The house is the seat of yajnic prosperity for the master of the house. And the home is the lady’s forte. This is the house-hold, a socioeconomic yajna in operation. 
1471 :y N MIH I r*4l til PM tjy) 4 ^ hJ | y UM PM t H m IH M N dehH [M tl 4 ,h 1 :11 ^ 11 In all yajnic activities of life : By courteous invitations and orders, you get responsive audience and assistants. By obliging favours, you get pleasing help and cooperation. By careful planning and preparation of the preliminaries, you reach the finale with credit and success. And with the pronouncement of a holy offer, you get the divine acceptance. 
1472 :By love and care of animals, you beget the wealth of animals. By oblations of rice cakes and generous gifts, you get the wealth of holy materials. By the knowledge and practice of sacred verses, you get the secrets of fire kindling. And by sacrificial chants and actions, you collect holy people around you. 
1473 :Roasted rice, pudding, barley meal, fried grain, milk, curds, mixed milk and curds, best of grains and honey, these are forms of soma, vital energy, and they are holy foods for the sacred fire. 
1474 :Seed of water-lily is symbol of rice and grains. Wheat is symbol of puddings. Cotton seed/jujube fruit is symbol of roasted grain powder. And barley is symbol of gruel. 
1475 :Barley is the form of milk. Jujube berry is the form of curd. Grain is the form of soma. And mix of milk or curd is the the form of the essence of soma. 
1476 :“Speak to us of knowledge”, say the disciples to the teacher. And let what is spoken, heard and understood be in conformity and unison. “Conduct the yajna”, say the yajniks. And conduct of the yajna is the function of the priest, the singers and the performers, all in unison. 
1477 :By half-Riks you get to the form and meaning of Uktha verses. By phrases you get to the Nivids, invocatory verses and formulae. By the chant and worship of Om you get to the form and meaning of mystic powers. By water and milk rejuvenation is achieved as by soma. 
1478 :The morning Soma-yajna is performed with hymns to the Ashvinis, the dawn, the sun and the moon. The mid-day Soma-yajna is performed with hymns to Indra for energy, power and honour. And the third, evening Soma-yajna, is accomplished and completed with hymns to Sarasvati, spirit and word of universal knowledge and inspiration for the sake of universal peace and happiness. 
1479 :With the properties of wind and air you get the energy of wind and air in the soma in the vayavya air- vessels. With filtration you get to the drona-measure vessel of soma. With two jars of corn and water, you get two water-jar measures of soma, one for stirring and cleansing and the other for the pure and distilled soma. And then by cooking cauldrons you get the finished cauldronfuls of soma offerings for the yajna. 
1480 :With verses of Yajurveda, you take ladlefuls of soma, learn the ways of the world and knowledge of the stars and planets. With the knowledge and libations, you come to stomas, hymns of praise and qualities of things and facts of life. With metres of verses and from singers, you come to formula hymns of the Veda and the secrets of weapons. And then with the recitation of Samans, you come to the valediction of yajna and the holy bath. 
1481 :With the sacred Word and worship you get food from the fields of earth. With sweet words and songs of reverence one gets all the good wishes and success to the heart’s desire. With a peaceful and generous mind the husband gets the best conjugal relations with his wife. And with the performance of yajna with the desired Yajurvedic hymns, you come to the consummation of settled life in a happy home. 
1482 :By the observance of discipline and celibacy, the child comes to initiation and consecration into learning and education. By learning and education, the young man/woman comes to settlement, wealth and honour. Settlement, wealth and honour begets faith. And through faith one comes to attain the ultimate truth and values of life and existence. 
1483 :This is the form of yajna with its meaning and values which has been described and prescribed by God, the Vedas and the Rishis. If a person is consecrated in a Sautramani yajna, performed in honour of Indra, i.e., in the service of God and for the good of the world, with the yajnopavita and the knots of dedication and commitment of oneself in faith, he/she is blest with all that and this, that is, in this life and hereafter. 
1484 :Great enlightened people, with rich libations of havi, promote yajna, source of joy, operative in space and maker of the brave. 
1485 :Let us too, blest with enlightenment, holding libations of soma for the divinities of heaven and earth, performing yajna in honour of Indra, lord of the universe, and ruler of the earth, rejoice with heavenly bliss on earth. 
1486 :Spirit of life, Indra, of your essence which is contained in the herbs and plants, that which is extracted from the soma plants and reinforced with energy (by cleansing and distillation) is most powerful and exhilararing. With that elixir of life, delight and inspire the yajamana, Sarasvati, lady of learning, Ashvinis, scholars and students of health and medicine, Indra, the ruler and administrators, and Agni, the leader and defenders of the land. 
1487 :Here for the sake of inspiration, I take this pure, honey sweet, bright and soothing soma drink of the supreme order which the experts of bio-science and the lady scholar of nutrition have extracted from the plants growing among the clouds on the mountains and distilled for the sake of exhilaration and rejuvenation of the mind and senses. 
1488 :Of the delicious and powerful soma juice of purest extraction available here, which the sun too draws up (and releases) with its rays, the soothing supreme and most inspiring part I drink with a happy and blessed mind here and now. 
1489 :To our parents and seniors, we offer their own share of food and reverence. To our grand-parents and seniors, we offer their own share of food and reverence. To our great-grand-parents and seniors, we offer their own share of food and reverence. Parents, partake of your own share we offer and rejoice. Rejoice and give us the pleasure of joy. Parents, teachers, seniors, enjoy yourselves to your full satisfaction and give us the satisfaction of service and reverence. Parents, teachers, seniors, be pure yourselves, and purify and sanctify us with the service we offer and your blessings. 
1490 :May my parents, grand parents, and great grand parents, kind, beneficent and honourable, purify me and sanctify me with the purity of discipline and education for a life of hundred years. 
1491 :May my grand parents and my great grand parents purify me and sanctify me with the purity of moral life and learning for a full life, so that with their blessings I may live for a full age of hundred years. 
1492 :Agni, father, mother, ancestors, saints and sages, purify and sanctify our years of life, purify and vitalize our food and energy, sanctify and bless our desires and ambitions. Keep off all mischief, evil and calamity far from us. 
1493 :enlighten me. May all the saints and sages purify me. Purify my intelligence and understanding with divine knowledge and science. May all the living beings, in fact everything of the wide world, lead me to knowledge and purity. 
1494 :Agni, blazing lord of light and fire, generous giver of knowledge and purging power, purify me with the purity and power of life’s vitality. With your light and sacred action, lord of action and holiness, purify and sanctify our knowledge, understanding and action. 
1495 :Agni, self-luminous lord of omniscience, within the holy light of your eternal consciousness shines the universal knowledge, the Veda. With that holy light of knowledge, enlighten, purify and consecrate me. 
1496 :Lord omniscient, that is pure, immaculate, saviour and purifier of all of us, may He with His purity and holiness purify and consecrate us here and now. 
1497 :Savita, lord of light and life, generation and inspiration, lord luminous of purity and holiness, with both your purity and holiness purify me wholly, and sanctify me with knowledge and good action. 
1498 :Of the widest range of intelligence and education among women, a most virtuous and brilliant personality may come and oblige us as teacher so that these many girls may be trained in wide knowledge and rational living for home life and we, as householders, happy and rejoicing in the corporate life of the community, may become masters of wealth and honour. 
1499 :May the parents, seniors, guardians of the people and officers who are under the governance of the ruler of the world be harmonious and agreeable in thought, word and deed, and may their home life, social status, standard of living and yajnic (creative) performance of duty be of the highest order of nobility and responsibility. And may they prosper and rise to the heights of divinity. 
1500 :My people who are living among the people around are of equal mind and noble action in thought, word and deed. May their honour, wealth and grace be vested in me and live on in me to grow for a hundred years in this world. 
1501 :I have heard of two paths of the existential travel of mortals, all that is bom of father and mother between earth and heaven: One, the path of the ancestors, and the other, the path of the divines. By these two paths does this world on the move moves on and on to its destination. 
1502 :May this fertility of mine, the married life, be a generative yajna, productive of ten brave children with all the virtues for the well-being of society. 
1503 :May this yajna and its production be the source of spiritual enlightenment, progress of the people, protection of animals, advancement of society and creation of fearlessness. 
1504 :Agni, lord of life and fertility, create for me lots of noble children. Bless us with plenty of food, milk and water, energy and generative vitality. 
1505 :May all our seniors, guardians of the nation, far and near, old and new, high and low, and all those of the middle rank, settled in peace, prosperity and power, inspire us with passion and energy. May our parents and seniors dedicated to truth and rectitude, far from violence and exploitation, who raise the pranic energy of life, guide and protect us in our battles of the world. 
1506 :Our parents and seniors, guardians of the nation, are seers and sages of the facts of holistic knowledge and law, scholars of the latest sciences, and experts of technology and engineering, all dedicated to universal love, non-violence and spiritual values and settled in mind for the peace and prosperity of mankind. 
1507 :Let us concentrate and dedicate ourselves to their wisdom, grace and excellence, and magnanimity and benevolence, for the reason of their devotion to yajna and their contribution to the progress of society. 
1508 :May our parents, seniors and ancestors, great lovers of life and divinity, settled in peace and prosperity, rich and generous at heart, come and join our soma-yajna in person or in memory. With their blessings and with their guidance may we, their children, fair and just in conduct, loving the gifts of life and keen to create happiness and share it with the community, realize all our aims and ambitions in the world. 
1509 :Soma, lord of light, peace and prosperity, spirit of yajna, brilliant you are, wide-awake and responsive. With your vision and wisdom, you lead us on by the noblest and simplest paths of nature to divinity. Lord of beauty and blessedness, inspired by your grace and guidance only do our parents, seniors and guardians of the community reach the coveted seats of joy and celebrity among the noblest souls of the world. 
1510 :Tvaya hi nah pitarah soma purve karmani cakruh pavamana dhirah. Vanvannavatah paridhih ’raponui virebhirasvairmaghavd bhava nah. 
1511 :Soma, lord of peace and power, by you alone our early forefathers, brave and constant all, performed their acts of glory. 
1512 :Inspiring spirit of commonalty, purging, purifying, unshaken and unviolated, be like Indra of the thunderbolt for us. Arise with passion for action and with your warriors of the horse throw off the forces of violence ranged around us. 
1513 :Soma, power of peace and prosperity, in covenant with the senior guardian spirits of humanity, grow and expand from earth to heaven. 
1514 :Spirit of beauty and joy, it is for the sake of growth and expansion that we offer fragrant oblations to your worship in yajna, so that we may create, protect, master and enjoy the riches of the world. 
1515 :Parents, seniors and guardians of humanity in yajnic seats of power, here are these refreshing presentations we have prepared for you which you please accept graciously and enjoy. Come to us and bring us peace and protection. Bless us with comfort and prosperity free from mischief and remove all the sins and evil from our life. 
1516 :I know the parents, seniors and guardians of life so kind and generous. I also know the dynamics of Lord Vishnu’s immanence in His creation. 
1517 :May the venerable seniors in yajnic seats of knowledge and vision, who in their own right enjoy the fragrant drinks distilled from the essence of life, come here and bless this place and me. 
1518 :Senior guardians of life and the human spirit established in inner peace and spiritual freedom are chosen by Grace to partake of the dearest treasures of universal knowledge and life divine. We call upon them: may they come here, may they listen to us, may they speak to us from the heights of divinity, may they redeem and save us! May our seniors and scholars established in the peace and prosperity of fire knowledge and yajna come to us by the noblest paths of divinity. And may they, in this our yajnic project of science and technology, enjoying themselves in their own right to their own knowledge, speak to us, enlighten us and protect us from ignorance and poverty. 
1519 :Senior scholars and experts of the science of heat and energy, men of justice and positive policy, come here to us, seat yourselves in every home and every hall of assembly, take the food and materials prepared with care and offered with love and hope, and, sitting in your laboratory and workshop, create the knowledge, impart it to people, and produce the wealth which creates versatile heroes for the nation and humanity. 
1520 :Those seniors who are experts of the science and technology of fire, and those who are not such but who are experts of other fields of knowledge, and all those who rejoice in the midst of the light of their own knowledge itself: for all these, the self-luminous lord of omniscience in-vests this body with health and energy according to their need and desire. 
1521 :Those experts of the science and technology of fire who work according to the seasons needs and who enjoy a drink of soma, we invite to social receptions and honour of felicitations. May they, noble scholars and creators, be great benefactors of society, and may we all become producers, protectors and masters of wealth and prosperity in the world. 
1522 :Noble seniors of the world, do not, for any reason whatever, destroy or injure our manliness and manpower. Take on this yajna for us, do it well and speak well of it. 
1523 :We sit kneeling on your right respectfully, and whatever your omission or commission in well-meaning work, we overlook and make up. And then we move on with the work in earnestness. 
1524 :Parents and seniors of the community, create and hold wealth for the man of charity and for the children sitting in the lap of their noble mothers. Give them ample means of living so that they may have ample energy. 
1525 :Agni, carrier of sumptuous foods and fragrance for the noble people, bless us with that wealth of life which you believe is fit for the use of divinities in nature and humanity, and which is worthy of celebration in the best of words worthy of the best listeners. 
1526 :Surely that person is the leader, torch bearer, path maker, first among all who is brilliant as Agni (fire) and spreads purity and fragrance all round. He/She respects the parents, seniors, ancestors and the promoters of truth and justice. He/She communicates the noblest thoughts and ideas in persuasive and powerful words to the seniors and the brilliant and generous people all round. 
1527 :Agni, brilliant master of noble thoughts, words and deeds, loved, invoked and adored, receive the gifts of life, convert them to fragrance and acknowledge. Share them with the parents, seniors and respectable people so that they too enjoy them as their own. These gifts are valuable, prepared and collected with effort. Generous as you are, enjoy them well. 
1528 :Ye ceha pitaro ye ca neha yahsca vidma yah ’u ca na pravidma. Tvaih vettha yati te jatavedah svadhabhiryajham sukrtam jusasva. 
1529 :Agni, brilliant and generous power, the seniors who are here, and those who are not here, and those whom we know, and those whom we don’t know, you know them all, how many they are and where they are, since you know everything that is anywhere. Let this yajna of service and adoration be done well. Carry it on with grace and with gifts made in faith and love. 
1530 :Let this food and adoration today be for the parents and seniors, those who came earlier, those who came later, those who are seated in this earthly world and those who are on the move for sure among the moving people. 
1531 :And Agni, brilliant scholar, just as our teachers, saints and sages, eminent and ancient, dedicated to the holy Word and serving the cause of universal truth and justice, realized the purity and blaze of that truth, and, breaking through the dark veil of the night opened the flood-gates of the light of dawn, so do you blaze, burn, purge, purify and enlighten the world. 
1532 :Noble youth, with all the love and care, we accept, maintain and educate you. Out of love and affection with all the care, we develop your personality and potential. You too, loving and caring, bear the responsibility for the food and maintenance of the loving parents and other seniors. 
1533 :Indra, ruler, commander, like the foam of the sea, like the vapours of water in the sky, rise and expand and break the head of the powers which hoard the wealth of the land like the cloud hoarding the waters. Conquer the forces which stand in opposition out of sheer jealousy. 
1534 :Soma, the man cleansed and distilled like soma through discipline, brilliant and inspiring, meditating on God and godly in character, by the simplicity and By his dedication to Rita, the universal Law of Dharma, he attains truth, spiritual power, soothing drinks, purity and vitality, best foods, honour and prosperity, water and milk, honey and the very nectar of life. 
1535 :The man of genius and discrimination trained by a divine sage, like the swan, separates the milk from the water, accepts the milk and rejects the water. 
1536 :With his dedication to the essential reality of existence through yoga, he attains the eternal verity, divine speech, the vision of word and meaning, purity of the inner light, spiritual food, honour and prosperity of the world, purest drinks, abiding health, and the honey-sweet joys of living. 
1537 :The man of discrimination, friend of pure visionaries, with the freedom of his vision, distils the essence, soma, from the waters as the swan separates the milk from water. He accepts the essence and rejects the scum. 
1538 :With his vision of the Vedas, he attains the truth of divinity, the purity and energy of food, direct experience of the divine presence, and the supreme taste of the sweetness and bliss of Immortality and Moksha. 
1539 :Prajapati, ruler and protector of the people, President of the council, alongwith the study of the Vedas, receives the juices, essences and inspiring vital sweets extracted from the ripe grains and blessed waters of the land, and wields the onerous responsibility of the state. 
1540 :With fair and enlightened justice he attains the people’s dedication to truth, the divine gift of national glory, comprehensive protection and defence, pure and vital foods, light of justice and knowledge, divine grace, energising drinks, honey, and noble state-order of immortal value. 
1541 :In the process of growth and regeneration, the male organ of generation discharges the semen. Entering the womb it discharges/releases the seed of life to plant it into the mother’s body. 
1542 :The foetus is covered with the placenta during its growth till maturity. When the seed is born as an independent soul in a new body-system, it abandons the cover in which it had grown and matured. (Thus elimination and regenerative growth through the natural movement of discharge, elimination, union and separation is part of life’s evolution under the universal law of nature, which is Rtam, creative dynamics of Lord Prajapati.) By Rtam, the soul (jiva) gets Satyam, natural existence of the body, Indriyam, organs of perception, drinks and assimilation, purity and vitality for regeneration, foods and growth, potentials for living and continuation, and the immortal honey sweets of the joys of existence for itself (jiva). 
1543 :Having over-seen two aspects of created Existence, Lord Prajapati analyses it into two forms: One, reality, truth, dharma; the other, unreality, illusion, adharma. Then Lord Prajapati places faith and commitment (shraddha) in truth, and no-faith and nocommitment (ashraddha) in untruth. 
1544 :With truth and faith He joins right mind and intelligence (rtambhara-buddhi) which is the Lord’s gift of saving grace, protective, purifying, and enlightening against the darkness of illusion. And this is the soul’s real power and faculty which can lead to the honey sweets and milky streams of immortality. 
1545 :By Veda, Prajapati, the soul, comes to know both forms of existence: Truth which is reality, dharma, Rtam, and untruth which is illusion, adharma, anartam. 
1546 :By Rtam it can realise the full potential of its faculties and the immortality of its essential nature, while with pure foods and drinks (in the interest of health and meditation) it can experience here and now the honey sweets and milky streams of nectar. 
1547 :Having viewed the essence of knowledge distilled with an objective mind from the panorama of existence, the consecrated Prajapati, guardian of his people, should drink this life-giving nectar of truth (Rtam). 
1548 :By Rtam, knowledge of reality, he attains the force of truth, joy of governance, purity of intention and action, plenty and prosperity, royal honour and dignity, and the pleasure and sweetness of immortality. 
1549 :Just as intelligent weavers weave designed cloth from woollen yarn with leaden loom, and intelligent designers create models of machines with their imagination and expertise, so do the Ashvinis, scholars and researchers of health and nature, Savita, man of inspiration and imagination, Sarasvati, woman of learning and education, Varuna, expert of health and medication, create models of creative and productive yajna and of the form and character of Indra, the ideal individual or ruler, the ideal family and the ideal society. 
1550 :Three divine powers, loving and generous, variously enact the immortal form and structure of this yajna with their acts and imagination: They structure the body hair, as if, with blades of grass, and the body cover (skin) with shoots and ears of corn; and roasted grains become, as if, the substance (flesh) of the body. 
1551 :Sarasvati, the enlightened woman, with dedicated mind and knowledge, weaves its beautiful inside, the bones and marrow created with the holy barley meal and vitalizing juices, while the Ashvinis, powers of health and healing, at the speed of energy, prepare for soma and place the filter and the cask on the floor of the earth. 
1552 :As a wise and intelligent expert designs and weaves a beautiful cloth on the loom with the shuttle, so does Sarasvati, enlightened woman of wisdom and science, with her mind and knowledge, create the charming, special and excellent form and structure of yajna with the help of friendly Ashvinis, specialists of health and healing: yajna (visible symbol of Indra, lord of honour, power and prosperity) in which the pure and vitalizing essence of soma joy distilled from all elements of nature ripples like the vital spirit (blood) of the body. 
1553 :(Three divinities, i.e., Sarasvati and the two Ashvinis) with milk, juices and inspiring drink of soma create the pure, life-giving, generative seed of life discharged from the generative organ (into the womb), and (for the same purpose of purity and vitality, with the same food and drink) ward off intellectual debility and ignorance as well as hyper-activity and arrogance from far and near. 
1554 :Indra, saviour, protector and preserver, with his heart and love, Savita, inspirer and giver of nourishments, with food and drink, create satyam, the reality of life and yajna, bringing it into formal manifestation. Varuna, with health and healing and with air and pranic energies preserves and maintains the working of the liver, lungs and neck, the chest and the digestive secretions. 
1555 :The intestines in the human body system (yajna) are like the cooking pans preparing delicious food for the vital fire. The bowels are like milk-pots or the udders of an abundant milch cow. The spleen, pancreas and liver are powerful defensive organs like the wings of an eagle pouncing on disease-attacks. The navel with its energizing actions is like the royal seat of power. And the stomach, to all the body parts, as the mother- host, distributes holy food among all members of the yajnic family. 
1556 :The husband, progenitor, is like ajar overflowing with love and vigour. Healthy and handsome, he is like an exuberant fountain flowing in a hundred streams of action with grace and piety. So is the wife, her womb a recipient jar into which the husband should project the seed, the foetus inside being like an oblation in honour of his parents and ancestors. 
1557 :and the health and spirits of the man, create a happy home with the head and mouth of both together in truth with a sweet tongue fluent in purity. The purity, comfort and security of the home, the love and desire of the woman’s fertility, the passion and power of the man’s virility, and the child as bloom of the health and love of the union, all these keep the family together. 
1558 :By the Ashvinis, sun and moon, with portions of clear soma distilled, is created the immortal light of the eye. With tonics prepared with goat’s milk is created the lustre of health. The lower and upper eyelashes are created with wheat and water lilies, and the beauteous form white as well as dark shines with the same nature’s gifts. 
1559 :Avirna meso nasi viryaya pranasya pantha’ amrto grahabhyam. Sarasvatyupavakairvyanam nasyan iba rh i rbada ra i rjajana. 
1560 :Like the sheep and the ram, the protector and contender, the Ashvinis, with portions of clear soma, create the immortal passage of pranic energy in the nose. Sarasvati, nature’s flowing vitality, with animation and energy, creates the systemic vyana air in the body, and with grains and fruits, she creates the hair-filter in the nose. 
1561 :The soul’s will to live in body form manifests as the bull for the expression of strength. From portions of nature’s auditory element in soma is created the immortal faculty of the ear. Barley, as the grass, manifests in the eyebrows. And the jujuba fruit creates the honey sweets that flow from the mouth. 
1562 :Atmannupasthe na vrkasya loma mukhe smasruni na vyaghraloma. Kesa na sirsanyasase sriyai sikha simhasya loma tvisirindriyani. 
1563 :In the presence of Divinity, the soul rises in eminence and potential: the lower hair of the body is like the hair of the wolf, the beard and moustache on the face are like the whiskers of the tiger, the hair on the head and the top hair glows with beauty and glory like the lion’s mane, and the senses shine as lightening. 
1564 :Thus do the Ashvinis, bio-engineers of nature, structure limbs for the soul, and thus does Sarasvati, divine mother, join the soul with the limbs, creating a living Indra of a hundred years of age blest with the immortal light and beauty of the moon. 
1565 :Sarasvati, the wife, bears inside the womb the foetus so well created by the Ashvinis, nature’s powers of creation, Varuna, supreme ruler, immanent in the world, integrating the soul with the vital essences of nature and completing the creation of a living Indra, the human being, for a glorious existence. 
1566 :The healthy glow of living forms, the mighty rich nourishments of life, the delicious honey collected by the bee from juices all round are the nectar, the vital power, the beauty distilled from the original as well as the refined sources of nature by Sarasvati, mother spirit of life and humanity through the Ashvinis, creative and healing powers of nature’s cosmic flow. 
1567 :President of the Council, you are the seat of world power. You are the centre-hold of the order of humanity. May no one challenge you! You too do not hurt me, any citizen. 
1568 :President of the Supreme Council, committed to noble resolutions of conscious choice, master of noble thoughts and good actions, best and first choice of humanity, be seated on the seat of governance among the peoples of the world for a sovereign world order. Save us from death and destruction. Save us from lightning and the thunderbolt. 
1569 :^ d ^flKII Pn EUt I fa fibril cil h i^IdjPhPddl-sitfaui ^infa In this yajnic world order of Lord Savita’s creation, with the arms of Ashvinis, harbingers of light and knowledge, the hands of Pusha, powers of strength and nourishment, and the efficacy of Ashvinis, powers of health and healing, I consecrate you for the sake of world-wide brilliance and universal glory of enlightenment. 
1570 :I consecrate you for Sarasvati, for the sake of learning and education of the people. 
1571 :With the powers of health and nutrition, I consecrate you for the sake of food and vigour for all. 
1572 :With the power and enlightenment of divine Indra, Lord of glory, I consecrate you for the achievement of the moral strength, honour and beauty of the world order. 
1573 :Man of high reputation and honour, leader of many noble causes, illustrious dispenser of truth and justice, you are a man of peace, giver of peace and prosperity. Therefore I accept and consecrate you in the service of Prajapati, divine lord of peace, and His people, for the achievement of universal peace and prosperity. 
1574 :People of the world: honour of the human nation is my head, nobility of the people is my mouth, light of justice and grandeur of world culture is my hair, moustache and beard, good governance is my life and breath, unity of the order is my vision, and diversity of the constituents is my ear. 
1575 :Members of the world state: My tongue shall speak for the good of all. My speech shall explain great projects. My passion shall target wickedness. My anger shall be for the defence of freedom. My fingers shall point to the paths of joy. My limbs shall dance with the people’s festivities. My prowess and challenges shall be for the promotion of love and friendship. 
1576 :May my arms, strength and prowess, my hands, actions and heroism, my heart and my very soul be for the supremacy and sovereignty of the world order. 
1577 :The government order is my back. My belly, shoulders, neck, hips and loins, thighs, elbows, knees, and all my limbs are wholly for the people — my people and my government are me. 
1578 :I am the ruler, honoured and consecrated among my people. I am Dharma, the law, committed to bear the burden of the order on my legs and feet. 
1579 :My navel, mind, knowledge, security, honour and reverence, hips and loins, organs of excretion, generation and pleasure, honour and dignity, and good fortune all is for the order and the people. 
1580 :Accepted, appointed and consecrated in this divinely protected Order of the brilliant State of the World: I dedicate and commit myself to the Order, in the Order, for the Order. I dedicate and commit myself to the State, in the State, for the State, to the people, among the People, for the People. I dedicate myself to the horses and cows. I dedicate myself to all parts of the Order and the State. Firmly established in my mind and soul, with all my soul and pranic energy, I dedicate myself to the living spirit and exuberant dynamics of the human nation. I dedicate myself to the growth and development of the strength and prosperity of the people. In the light of heaven and greenery of the earth and her environment, I dedicate myself to heaven and earth. I dedicate and commit myself to the grand socioeconomic yajna of service, governance and brilliance of a generous humanity for total and holistic development. 
1581 :Three are the orders of divinities, brilliant powers of nature’s generosity. Three times eleven are they, thirtythree powers of grandeur and majesty all, Brihaspati, the Sun, great lord of light and knowledge being their chief. 
1582 :In this great world of Lord Savita’s yajnic creation, may the devas, brilliant scholars of knowledge and generosity, with all these divine powers, protect me and promote me for the higher life. 
1583 :i. Eight Vasus, abodes and supports of life, are: earth, water, fire, air, space, sun, moon and the stars. 
1584 :ii. Eleven Rudras, viz., five primary pranic energies (prana, apana, vyana, udana and samana), five secondary pranic energies (naga, kurma, krikala devadatta and dhananjaya), and the soul. They are Rudras because they destroy pain, and when they leave the body they make people cry in sorrow. 
1585 :iii. Twelve Adityas, viz., twelve months of the year, they being zodiacs of the sun in the year. They are Adityas because they count up the time and exhaust the life of whatever is born. In addition to these (8+11+12), there is Indra, universal electric energy, and Yajna, The first order of divinities (Vasus) with the second order (Rudras), the second with the third (Adityas), the third with Satya (nature), nature with yajna (science and technology), science and technology with Yajurveda hymns (application), application with Samaveda hymns (dedication, devotion and joy), dedication with Rgveda hymns (knowledge and vision), knowledge with Puronuvakas of Atharva (specialization), specialisation with Yajnas (yajnic work), yajnic work with Vashatkaras (noble work), noble work with ahutis (oblations), oblations (inputs) with sincere conduct, and all these (in cycle with the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas and so on) on the earth — may all these grant all my desires and promote me among the people. 
1586 :The hair on my body, my effort and action, my skin, my humility, my coming and income, my flesh, my courtesy, my wealth, bones, marrow and my humility and reverence be all for the teachers and preceptors. 
1587 :Teachers, preaches, saints and sages, whatever our offence we have done to the devas, noble powers, may Agni, Lord God and the noble saint, forgive, and save us from all that offence, irreverence and sin. 
1588 :If we commit any sin or offence either in the day or in the night, then may Vayu, lord of dynamic knowledge and imagination, deliver me from all that sin and offence. 
1589 :If we happen to commit any offence or sin either while awake or while asleep, then may Sun, lord of brilliant knowledge and warmth, deliver me from all that offence and sin. 
1590 :Saints and sages, whatever offence or sin we happen to commit in the village, or in the forest, or in the assembly, or in the mind, or among the assistants, or among the employers, or against anyone’s dharma, conscience or profession, then you alone are the powers to save and deliver us from that. 
1591 :Prana, life, is precious and sacred. The cow is precious and sacred, inviolable. Varuna, Lord Supreme, the eminent sage, is great. If ever we injure, violate or revile these, then, O Varuna, O generous sage, deliver us from that sin. 
1592 :Noble sage of knowledge, you are initiated and consecrated, blessed, calm and generous as a fountain. Ward off the sins committed by the nobles, through/by the nobles. Let the ordinary people fight out and eliminate the crimes committed by the average people. Save us from fear, terror and violence. 
1593 :Samudre te hrdayamapsvantah sam tva visantv- osadhirutapah. Sumitriya’ na’ apa’osadhayah santu dunnitriyastasmai santu yo’sman dvesti yam ca vayam dvismah. 
1594 :Soma, disciple, your heart and soul is in sea, in the midst of the energy there and in the depths of celestial waters. May the pranic energies and the vitality of the herbs enter your mind with their secrets. May the herbs and the pranic energies be friendly to us. They will be unfriendly to those negativities which harm us and which we, in consequence, hate and avoid. 
1595 :Like a prisoner freed from a post of captivity, like a man in sweat cleansed of dirt after bath, like ghee purified of scum through a strainer, may the waters and energies purge me of sin and evil into the purity of freedom. 
1596 :Up we move beyond the dark with a vision of the higher regions of bliss, and may we reach the sun, the Lord of Light Supreme, among the lights of the world. 
1597 :Apo ’adyanvacarisain rasena samasrksmahi. Payasvanagna’agamarh tarn ma sain srja varcasa prajaya ca dhanena ca. 
1598 :I have tasted the waters of bliss to-day. Let us all create joy and open out to the flood gates of freedom and bliss. 
1599 :Agni, having drunk of joy and bliss, I have come to you. Lord of light and knowledge, bless me with children, wealth of knowledge and prosperity and the splendour of honour and dignity. 
1600 :Samit, food of the holy fire, you are the harbinger of prosperity. May we be prosperous. You are the food of the light divine, light itself. Infuse light and lustre into me. May the earth be generous. May the dawns bring us light and peace. May the sun give light and warmth. May this whole world be full of joy. May I shine with the light of the world and be the light itself. May I attain my desire and great ambitions. May I, with truth of word and deed, attain the glory of the world. 
1601 :Agni, lord keeper and sustainer of the vows of speech and karma, initiated and consecrated I place the fuel into the holy fire with concentration and dedication of mind. I light the fire and commit myself to the vows of yajna and faith in the divine order. 
1602 :Where the Brahma order of learning and the Kshatra order of governance coexist and work together in harmony, and where the noble citizens abide by the fire of yajna, that holy land and spirit divine, O Lord, I pray, reveal to me. 
1603 :Where Indra is light and power, and Vayu breath of life, and both in unison work for all, where want is non-existent and weariness no more, that holy land of plenty and sacred joy, O Lord of Light, reveal to me. 
1604 :Soma is the Spirit of life, fragrance imperishable, inexhaustible, eternal. 
1605 :Let the filament of the soma plant stay joined to the branch, let the branch with the plant mature and be whole with the plant. 
1606 :May the knot of the cane grow out of the knot, stay joined to the knot, mature and be one and whole with the tree. 
1607 :Soma, Spirit of life, may your fragrance and eternal vitality protect the unity and wholeness of life among all its constituent parts. 
1608 :Those who take the shower of bliss in soma, life divine, merge wholly, purge and raise themselves, and purify their soul with the nectar for the sake of vitality, dignity and ecstasy of living, they are the immortals. ‘So what?’ says the sceptic and ends up in the doubt. 
1609 :Indra, master of knowledge and power of speech, in the morning accept and enjoy our food, delicious and rich with nutriments, mixed with curds and honey cakes, excellently prepared with holy recipes and offered with reverence. 
1610 :Heroes of knowledge, ever watchful, promoters of truth and right, sing the great joyous songs of Brihat- Sama in honour of mighty Indra, lord of the universe, by which you would awaken the heavenly light which will break through the clouds of darkness and open the flood-gates of light and prosperity. 
1611 :High-priest of yajna, bring down the soma, waters of life, distilled from the clouds and sanctify them for the drink of Indra and his citizens of the world order. 
1612 :The Lord that is the presiding power of all the forms of existence, under whose law the worlds of the universe reside, who is greater than the greatest and reigns supreme over all, to this Lord of existence, for His grace, I bow in faith. 
1613 :Lord of mine and all, I come, I hold on to you, and I consecrate my heart and soul with your presence. 
1614 :Teacher/scholar, approved and authorized you are by the Ashvinis, teachers and scholars of eminence, for the service of Sarasvati, language and learning, Indra, administration, and Sutraman, security and discipline. 
1615 :Now here is your new office with the Ashvinis, teachers and scholars, with adequate powers in the service of Sarasvati, teaching and research, Indra, administration, planning and development, and Sutraman, discipline and security of the organisation. 
1616 :Soma, teacher scholar, you are protector of my prana, apana, eye and ear, speech and language, and you are the master and controller of my mind. 
1617 :On invitation, I take the food served here as it has been prepared by experts, supervised by learned women, ordered by Indra, the dignified host, and certified by the chief of security. 
1618 :Just as Indra, the sun, ancient light of the world, refulgent in the splendour of the dawn, blazing and advancing in the east with thirty three devatas, destroys the clouds of darkness and opens the flood gates of light, so do you, brilliant man of knowledge and modern challenges, advance with all the force of your scholars of the Vasu, Rudra and Aditya order, destroy the darkness of ignorance and open the flood gates of the light of knowledge. 
1619 :Universally admirable is the man who is brave and totally fearless, maker of many things, self- dependent and self-protective, wholly dedicated to yajna, farming the land with bulls and cows, well- provided with milk, butter and honey, bright with golden wealth, and highly enlightened, and begins his day with yajna. 
1620 :Indra, the man respected and admired by the godly, brilliant spirit of many yajnas, invited and engaged in discussions with presentations, bold yet patient, breaking the clouds and enemy forts like Indra, lord of the thunderbolt, is invited to our yajna. May he come and grace the yajna with his presence. 
1621 :expansive lord of the rays of light, pervading the sky and regions of the universe, united with the Vasus and the Adityas, graces the ancient, vast, beautiful and celebrated floor of the earth, so please you, celebrated man of yajna, grace our home of yajna. 
1622 :Just as noble women sweet of speech and good wives and mothers to be, eagerly join Indra, virile young men of power and dignity, and find the door to their new home of settlement, so should noble and virile young men, celebrated for their power and dignity, take to good and virtuous women wholly and freely and settle in a happy new home. 
1623 :Night and dawn, beautiful, great, abundant, generous, wearing the design of the warp and woof of light, already spread out in the east, with form and colour, adorn Indra, the rising sun, light of lights so (Just as night and dawn look forward to the sun, so should the people look forward to and associate with the brilliant and the brave and fearless.) Teachers and preachers, learned and brilliant makers of yajnic projects, generous in oblations, noble of speech, first and foremost in yajnic organisations, leaders and supporters of people in many ways, with honey and fragrant materials light up, promote and advance the ancient fire of yajna and glorify Indra, the Spirit, power and ecstasy of the holy performance. 
1624 :The trinity of Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati, universally active like nursing mothers, constantly feed, sustain and augment the continuous flow of life-yajna with holy food and drinks, serving thereby and pleasing Indra, lord of existence. (Ida holds the inexhaustible potential, Sarasvati controls the flow, and Bharati defines the forms in the continuum.) May Tvashta, creator of fine and sophisticated forms, provide the weapons of defence and power for virile Indra, lord defender of life. Let the dynamic man going far and wide collect various and versatile materials for his glory. Let the generous man of tempestuous speed studying the rain and clouds at the head of yajna (of science and technology) bring together the noblest scholars and sages in the service of the generous Indra. 
1625 :The chief of the forests, like an arrow shot from the bow, with all the bonds of dedication of his heart and soul, fills the treasures of Indra with created wealth like the brilliant and blissful yajna of the nation, and himself too enjoys the honey sweet gifts of the yajna. 
1626 :May the brave, generous and exalted hero, Indra, conqueror of the violent, and the brilliant realized souls among humanity, rejoicing at heart by the sacred acts of their holy sacrifice into the fire and gifts of love and kindness, drink of the nectar sweets of soma in yajnic life and live the ecstasy of their immortal being on earth. 
1627 :May Indra, mighty hero, come for our defence and protection here and, sung and celebrated, be with us as a friend and companion, augmenting his forces trained by veterans, which superior power of his forces, able to suppress the enemies, may strengthen and promote our social order like the umbrella of vast heavens. 
1628 :Indra, come to us from far and near for our protection. Mighty hero, achiever of cherished goals, ruler of the people, man of arms of steel, victorious over the enemies, come with the most powerful forces for our defence in the battles of life. 
1629 :May Indra, eminent man of dynamic knowledge and movement, come well with his power of horse for our protection and advancement in prosperity. Wielder of the thunderbolt, lord of power and majesty, mighty strong, may he grace this our yajna with favour. May he stand by us firm and inviolable in the battles of life. 
1630 :I invoke Indra, lord of might and majesty, adorable and universally adored, saviour, protector and promoter of His creation. I invoke Him for protection in every problem of life. 
1631 :I call upon Indra, royal and brave ruler of the nation, saviour and protector of the people, and destroyer of the nation’s enemies. I call upon him for protection and solution of every problem in the life of the nation. 
1632 :I call upon Indra, commander of the army, defender and protector of the land, instant in action, for defence in every battle of the nation. 
1633 :May Indra, saviour, protector, defender and promoter of life, destroyer of evil and router of the enemy, lord of power and prosperity, bless us with all that is good and hold it safe for us. 
1634 :May Indra, lord of life and the world, gracious saviour and protector, sole lord of his power and people, master of universal wealth and knowledge, lord of progress and advancement, we pray, be kind and give us all the protection we need. 
1635 :May the lord keep off all hate and enemies and bless us with freedom from fear. We pray we may be defenders and promoters of manly power and honour. 
1636 :May Indra, lord of life and the world/Ruler of the land, master of his own power and people, saviour and protector, always and everyway keep off from us whatever hate or emity is there far and near. 
1637 :May we be with him in his yajna of life, in his creative and constructive works, and abide by him enjoying the favour of his love as well as judgement. 
1638 :Come Indra, lord of might and majesty, by your charming peacock-haired horses. Let none whatsoever hold you back, let no hunter catch you with snares like a bird. March on like an exceptional hero of the bow, advance and take them (the enemies) on. 
1639 :The best, richest and most excellent people, well settled in peace and prosperity, honour and worship with prayers and good works Indra, lord of might and majesty, ruler of the land and the world, hero of the arms of steel. Honoured and worshipped thus, may he hold and protect our land and nation blest with heroic warriors and the wealth of cows, fields and pastures. 
1640 :Agni, lighted, heated, burning and blazing as universal and sovereign light of the world, inspired with vitality, creates food and energy for the Lord’s creation. 
1641 :Sarasvati, voice of universal knowledge, holds the pure nectar of the wealth and grandeur of the spirit of life and, like a cow, yields it for the nourishment and benefit of men and women of the world. 
1642 :So must I create light and vitality. So should all men and women do like the Ashvinis, powers of health and nourishment. 
1643 :In this world of beauty created with the sweetness of soma distilled from the spirit of nature, both the Ashvinis, powers of health, the physicians, and Sarasvati, scholar of knowledge and the divine voice, should bear the honour and glory of Indra, lord of the world, and render it back to Indra,the ruler, in faith and gratitude. 
1644 :Let Sarasvati, mother scholar of knowledge and the Vedic voice, create the inspiring honour and joy of life by the admirable yajna of the people in honour of Indra, lord of yajna and the world. 
1645 :Let the Ashvinis, experts of health and medicine, create and bear the sweet medicinal panacea in honour of the Lord. 
1646 :praised all round, should hold in the home the best of health-giving, rejuvenating and powerful foods for her husband’s body, mind and senses. The physicians and nutricians should, with their knowledge and researches, create special energising foods, elevating tonics and blissful wealth of health. 
1647 :The scholars of science and medicine and women of knowledge and motherly love, with all their research and yajnic dedication, should create and bear for Indra pure nectars of vitality distilled from the juices extracted from all herbs for the cure of chronic and deadly diseases. 
1648 :Kavasyo na vyacasvatirasvibhyam na duro disah. Indro na rodasi’ubhe duhe kamant- sarasvatl. 
1649 :As the humming bees go round wide spaces, as wide spaces are lit up by the sun and moon, as Indra, universal energy, invigorates the heaven and earth, so does Sarasvati, mother of vision and knowledge, with the Ashvinis, fiery energy of the sun and soothing beauty of the moon, create all the means of joy and comfort for all. 
1650 :Day and night from early dawn to evening, Ashvinis, scholars of knowledge and wisdom, with Sarasvati, mother of joy and generosity, in words of sweetness and persuasion, knowing well together life and its values, invest Indra, the human spirit, with a handsome form and noble faculties, powers and prosperity. 
1651 :Men of knowledge and wisdom, teachers and preachers, and mother Sarasvati protect and promote us day and night. 
1652 :Noble men of yajna and sacrifice, men of health and medicine, working together in the world, save and protect the human spirit, create and protect the spirit of Three motherly spirits, Vedic vision, knowledge and wisdom, and the mother-land, and two powers of health and medicine, may distil and create the intense and joyous nectar of soma extracted from all nature for Indra, the human soul, in three ways, that is, for physical, mental and spiritual nourishment. 
1653 :The soma juice of health having been prepared for us and Indra, the ruling powers, may the Ashvinis, sanative powers of nature and the scholars, Sarasvati, generous motherly women of knowledge, and Tvashta, refiners and creators of beautiful forms bless us with honey-sweets of life, honour, wealth and prosperity and graceful forms of individual and social life appropriate for everyone. 
1654 :Let Indra, the ruling power, the chief of the forests, the great growing trees, the generous cow and the enlightened mother, Sarasvati, with the advice and expertise of the Ashvinis, scholars of health care and medication, create and produce powerful honey-tonics from the flowing and fermenting juices according to the seasons. 
1655 :Ashvinis, expert powers of health and nutrition, like milk produced and held by cows, create and hold for the man of power and glory soma, honey-sweet tonics, distilled from widely extracted juices mixed with curds and barley prepared by the generous mother Sarasvati with love and dedication. 
1656 :Let the Ashvinis, scholars of health and nature, and Sarasvati, expert of science and the divine word, with their intelligence and vision, distil and create from the heavenly waters of space, modes of Prakriti, pure vitality, exceptional drinks, wealth and prosperity, sacred materials for yajna, and noble mind and senses worthy of the man of honour and glory. 
1657 :Indra, man of power and glory, whom the Ashvinis, masters of health and vitality, and Sarasvati, lady of knowledge and divine speech, together, created and reared with holy foods and drinks, could surely break through the wondrous vitalities of nature hidden in the heavenly waters of space. 
1658 :That wondrous vitality of soma which the animals, both the Ashvinis, scholars of life sciences, and Sarasvati, generous mother scholar of knowledge and divine vision share and bear in common, you all celebrate and intensify in yajna with powerful holy offerings and yourselves shine bright in consequence. 
1659 :Lord creator Savita, supreme lord Varuna, and Bhaga, lord of glory, bless Indra, lord of power and prosperity, with wealth and riches of mind and sense. The same lord Indra of yajna and holy materials, saviour and protector of the soul, we pray, may provide for the yajamana. 
1660 :The supreme lord Varuna, creator Savita, and saviour and protector of life Sutrama, collect energy, prosperity and efficiency of intelligence from the spatial currents of nature and bear it to bestow it on the generous yajamana. 
1661 :Just as Varuna, man of excellence, Savita, creative man of inspiration, and Sutrama, protective man of industry, create the social order, power, strength and beauty, and hold and sustain it with honour and grace and thereby attain the fruits of yajna. So should all men and women try to achieve the earthly goal of their life with yajna. 
1662 :The Ashvins, creative and curative powers of nature, and the teacher and the preacher, and Sarasvati, universal intelligence, and the woman of knowledge and enlightenment advance Indra, prosperous man of yajna, with wealth and power by cows and produce of the earth, valour and prowess by horses, and moral and spiritual strength by the holy foods of yajna fire. 
1663 :Indra, leader and path-maker possessed of the wealth of knowledge and power, those two Ashvinis, teacher and preacher, graceful of form, immaculate in thought and conduct, foremost in virtue moving on the paths of gold, and Sarasvati, generous mother overflowing with yajnic materials, guide and protect us on the paths of action. 
1664 :The two physicians of body and soul, teacher- preacher and the doctor, the learned woman, giver of total fulfilment, and the brilliant man of hundred-fold genius, mighty opener of the treasures of good fortune, may these create and promote all the power and prosperity for Indra, the happy man. 
1665 :Come Ashvinis, both protector promoters of life, come-Sarasvati, enlightened mothers of the land, come all of you together, and, drinking deep at the nation’s fount of glory, defend her honour at every move in the onward march to progress within the ceaseless flow of divine evolution. 
1666 :Indra, lord of knowledge, power and grandeur, now that you have drunk keep at the joyous fount of life with your mighty deeds of grace worthy of poetic songs of celebration, may Sarasvati, enlightened mother of the land, recompense and consecrate you. May both the Ashvinis, divine powers of health and intelligence, like father and mother, protect and promote you as a child. 
1667 :Man of knowledge, enlightened citizen, blessed is the land where horses, strong and virile bulls and bullocks, cows, sheep and other animals are planned, produced, raised, trained, and deployed in service; where Agni, brilliant leader and ruler and a revered man of knowledge is protector and promoter of food and bearer of the burdens of soma for the prosperity of the people; there, in the land, noble citizen, create a good disposition, high opinion and charming love for Agni. 
1668 :Agni, rich libations of havi, fragrant materials as ghee in the ladle and soma in the cup are offered into your fiery mouth. We pray create for us and bless us with plenty of food and victorious generosity, noble warlike children, wealth and prosperity and resounding honour of universal order. 
1669 :Ashivinis, creative powers of nature and the experts of health and nutrition, Sarasvati, divine intelligence and the enlightened mother, and Indra, the sun and the man of knowledge and power, these create and strengthen for the living soul the eye with light, virility with pranic energy, a sharp mind with senses, and honourable disposition with vital energy and noble speech. 
1670 :Ashvinis, eminent teacher and sagely preacher going by the path of truth, and Rudras, men of justice and rectitude, go slow by the path of the cow, go fast by the path of the horse, as is fair, but see you go by the path which is beneficial to humanity and worthy of acceptance and support. 
1671 :Ashvinis, ruler and defender, showers of wealth and shelter of the strong, let there be no man too strong uncontrollable, far or near or in the middle, to terrorize us or jeopardize the state. 
1672 :Ashvinis, both ruler and commander of the state, with your intelligence, create, bear and manage the wealth bright and beautiful as gold which may bring honour and comfort to the nation. 
1673 :Sarasvati, mother spirit of divinity, mistress of sacred knowledge and super-intelligence, purifier of the mind and soul and creator of prosperity with divine vision and knowledge of nature, may, we pray, grace and intensify our yajna and bless us with purity and prosperity. 
1674 :Sarasvati inspires the voices of holy truth, she awakens and brightens the noble intelligence of intellectuals. May she, we pray, bear our yajna forward and carry it on to high success. 
1675 :Sarasvati, Divine Intelligence, inspires the cosmic mind with consciousness and vests the universal Word with meaning and self-revelation. It illuminates the mental faculties of the soul with divine light and matures their potential for self-expression. 
1676 :Indra, lord of versatile forms and lights of knowledge, ruler, president of the assembly, come and take your share of the things rich in quality, prepared by hand and cleansed by fingers. 
1677 :Indra, lord of power and majesty, refined by intelligence, inspired by the wise, enlightened by the divine voice, come and accept the reverence and hospitality of the makers of soma. 
1678 :Indra, lord of knowledge and power, come on horse and chariot at your fastest and, in our yajnic celebration, accept our homage of food and prayer. 
1679 :Ashvinis, scholars of nature and teachers of humanity, with Sarasvati, vision and voice of divinity, may drink deep of the honey-sweets of life. 
1680 :Indra, lord of power and prosperity, saviour of society, dispeller of darkness and breaker of the clouds, may enj oy the nectar-sweets of peace and somaic ecstasy. 
1681 :Varuna, lord supreme and first of my choice and love, I yearn for light and protection and I have come to you: Listen to this prayer of mine to-day and be pleased to bless me. 
1682 :Varuna, lord supreme, as the yajamana honours you with holy offerings in worship, so do I come to you singing songs of praise. Universally sung and celebrated, pleased and gracious, enlighten us here. Let not our life slip away through the fingers. 
1683 :Agni, sagely man of light, brilliant scholar and teacher, most dedicated to yajna, surest guide to light and life, purest purifier, save us from frivolity and offence to Varuna, lord supreme of the world, and help us keep away from all hate and anger. 
1684 :Agni, light of life, be our saviour and protector at the closest with all the favour and felicity as in the light of the dawn. Joyous and generous, lead us on to Varuna, lord supreme of the world. Kind and compassionate, come in response to our invocation and bring us the gifts of your grace. 
1685 :For our protection and sustenance, we invoke and serve the great Aditi, creative power of the universe, mother of the observer of pious vows of discipline, keeper of the universal laws of truth, mighty queen of the earth, unageing, expansive, sweet shelter of all, inviolable and the generator of noble values. 
1686 :Let us, for the sake of success and salvation, mount the boat with efficient ores, sailing across to safety, firm as earth, bright as heaven, inviolable, sweet shelter, unbreakable, well-guided, divine, faultless and free from leakage. 
1687 :Let me ride the boat to safety and prosperity — the boat is auspicious, faultless, sinless, and fitted with a hundred oars. 
1688 :Mitra and Varuna, noble experts of our yajna of science and technology, sprinkle and consecrate our underground path ways with water, and shower our paths in the sky with honey. 
1689 :Pra bahava sisrtam jlvase na’a no gavyuti- muksatam ghrtena. A ma jane sravayatam yuvana srutam me mitravaruna havema. 
1690 :Mitra and Varuna, young people of science and technology, listen to this prayer of mine. Extend your arms for the progress of our life. Sprinkle our yajnic paths with water and ghrta. Speak among the people of this programme of ours. 
1691 :May the brilliant men of science and power of arms, noble and generous, moving at a balanced speed, be always good and auspicious to us in our projects. As the sun breaks down the clouds, so, destroying the serpents, wolves and demons of the society, may they remove our wants and ailments and give us peace and prosperity. 
1692 :Brilliant geniuses of the yajna of science and technology, self-realized souls, visionaries of the truths and laws of nature, defend and advance us in battle after battle of our life and in all our economic projects. Drinking deep of the honey-sweets of this programme, rejoice, content yourselves and, having completed your purpose of life, retire by the paths of the divines. 
1693 :The yajna fire lighted and fed with holy fuel, the blazing sun, the brilliant man of knowledge, gayatri verses, the divine speech that sustains the body, mind and soul, these bear the life and honour for us and the yajamana. 
1694 :The protective powers of the body, the sustaining powers, those who observe the holy vows of purity, the creative intelligence of the universe, the ushnik verses, the redeemer of the fallen, the chant of divinity, these hold the secret of life and splendour for humanity. 
1695 :Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge worthy of homage and research with holy mantras, the generous and divine Soma, the self-realized soul, anushtup verses, the sustainers and protectors of the five orders of humanity from the highest to the lowest, and the scholar singer of the divine Word, these hold the secrets of life and age with perfect mind and senses for us. 
1696 :in space, blazing and beautiful, immortal existence and source of sustenance, and the sagely scholar, master of his body, mind and soul, and the divine speech, these hold the knowledge and the mind and senses for the seekers. 
1697 :In the world here, the grand directions of space, divine revelations through the doors of nature, Brahma, lord of knowledge, the sun, great source of light and warmth, pankti verses, the sage in the fourth quarter of his life’s experience, and the generous cow, these bear the life and the wealth of life for us. 
1698 :In this world here, the early dawn and the evening twilight with the grandeur and peace of their beauty, the immortal powers of divinity in life and nature, trishtup verses, the ox that patiently carries the burdens on his back, these bear and sustain the life and senses for us all. 
1699 :Two divine personalities dedicated to yajna, the physicians, men of focussed mind working together (like fire and wind in the sky), jagati verses, the bull and the cow, these hold and bear the life and the desired wealth of life for us. 
1700 :In the world here, three, earth, Speech and Intelligence, the winds, the humans and other living forms, and virat verses, like the milch cow and the bullock, sustain the life and the health and wealth of life for us. 
1701 :Nature’s speedy and wonderful power of catalysis and formation, pranic energy, vital heat and light, givers of vigour and growth, the two-pada verses, like the virile bull and the generous cow, bear the secrets of life as well as the mind and senses. 
1702 :The best of peace-giving trees and herbs and the chief of the forests, the sun that creates and promotes the grandeur of life, the Kakup verses, the barren cow as well as the cow in season create for us the desired objects of life. 
1703 :Varuna, lord supreme of the grand order of humanity, with creative yajnic acts, creates the yajna of unification and produces sanative drugs and waters for health. The atichhanda verses, rishabha, the mighty generous bull, and the supreme herbs provide the means of life and prosperity beyond ordinary desires. 
1704 :The brilliant and generous Vasus, celebrated and worshipped with the Rathantara Sama, along with the spring season and with their own splendour, create the energies for the growth of life in the soul. 
1705 :The generous Rudras worshipped with the fifteenfold stoma of Brihat Sama, with the summer season create strength and power with honour for the life of the soul. 
1706 :The Adityas, worshipped with seventeenfold stoma in virupa verses, alongwith the rainy season, create life and life-energies alongwith lustre and noble people for enrichment of the soul for Indra. 
1707 :The Ribhus, brilliant and generous artists celebrated in the twenty-one fold stoma with the Viraja verses, in unison with the autumn season, create for man the means of health and age, comfort and beauty, and vest it in the soul with all the grace and majesty. 
1708 :The brilliant and generous Maruts, fiery and stormy geniuses, celebrated in the twenty seven fold stoma with shakvari verses, with the clouds, in unison with the winter season, create the means of good life and living and the courage and patience of mind and vest it in the soul. 
1709 :Immortal powers of exceptional brilliance and generosity celebrated in thirty three fold stoma with revati verses, in unison with the cool and dewy season, create, with truth and full faith, health and age, means of good living, and a powerful social order for the master Let the generous man perform yajna on the earth and light the fire in the vedi with holy fuel in honour of Agni, light of life, Ashvinis, sun and moon, Indra, cosmic power, and Sarasvati, creative intelligence of the universe. 
1710 :Like the purple fire and grey smoke of the yajna, sweet sanative fragrances would rise with the libations of wheat and berries as shoots of grass. Like the brilliance of fire would follow the lustre of life, wealth and prosperity, milk and delicacies, soma distilled from nature, nectar of waters and honey-sweets of the world. 
1711 :O devotee of yajna, perform the sacrifice with the richest offerings in faith. 
1712 :Let the man of yajna, preserver of good health, perform yajna in honour of Sarasvati, creative intelligence of the world, and Ashvinis, sanative and curative powers of nature who, like a ram, protector of the flock, bear for Indra, the soul, efficacious tonics, manly vigour and splendour by the honeyed paths of health. Let him perform the yajna with berries, superior barley and shoots of corn; and then medicinal waters, juices, milk, soma from herbal essences, butter and honey would follow. 
1713 :O man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of ghrta and fragrant materials. 
1714 :Hota yaksannarasafnsam na nagnahum patifn suraya bhesajam mesah sarasvati bhisagratho na candryasvinorvapa ’indrasya viryam badarai- rupavakabhirbhesajam tokmabhih pay ah somali parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 
1715 :Let the man of yajna perform yajna in honour of the master challenger of want and wickedness like a hero of people’s celebration, and pray for medicinal cures with stimulating tonics, and for heroic lustre of life with the offers of berries, barley and shoots of com in all sincerity of word and deed. And the generous scholar, Sarasvati, mother of life and intelligence, the physician, like a brilliant warrior of the chariot, would bless him. And then the sanative blessings of earth and heaven, delicious drinks and milk, soma distilled from herbal essences, nectar-like waters and butter and honey would follow. 
1716 :Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of ghrta and fragrant offerings. 
1717 :Inspired by grace, called by the sacred voice, let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of Sarasvati, divine intelligence, Indra, universal glory, and Ashvinis, nature’s powers of health and growth, with libations of barley, excellent berries as well as puffed rice. He would thus be strengthening, refining and promoting food, medicines and life’s beauty for the soul with the aid of medicinal plants and cow’s milk. And then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from herbal juices, ghee and honey would follow. 
1718 :Arise, faithful man of yajna, perform the yajna, and move on to growth. 
1719 :Let the man of yajna, the physician, perform the yajna to explore the soft and deep skies. Let the two faithful physicians of nature, the Ashvinis, the expert physician specialist of the mare with the foal, the expert physician specialist of the milch cow, and Sarasvati, scholar of the divine voice, distil from nature divine cures for Indra, the soul. And then milk and rejuvenating drinks, soma from vital juices, ghee and honey would follow. 
1720 :Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best libations of ghrta. 
1721 :Hota yaksadduro disah kavasyo na vyacasvati- rasvibhyam na duro disa ’indro na rodasi dughe duhe dlienuh sarasvatyasvinendraya bhesajam sukraih na jyotirindriyam payah somah parisruta ghrtam madhu vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 
1722 :Let the man of yajna perform the yajna of exploration, explore the highways of spaces, resounding and expansive as if the doors of the spaces are opened by Indra and Agni for him. Let him, like Indra, explore earth and heaven both replete with energy like the mother cow. Let Sarasvati, scholar and visionary of the divine word, explore the sun and the moon, distil the panacea and splendour of life as pure and powerful as light itself for Indra, the soul. And then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from nature, ghee and honey would follow and flow upon the earth. 
1723 :Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of ghee in love and faith. 
1724 :Just as the beautiful dawn and twilight decorate the day and night, just as the Ashvinis, sun and moon, with Sarasvati, currents of universal energy, vest and brighten up lustre and vitality in Indra, the powerful soul, so should the man of yajna, like an eagle (scholar), one with the soma of the sky, bring and offer rice and barley pudding in yajna with whole-hearted faith and grace of mind. And then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from nature, ghee and honey would follow and flow on the earth. 
1725 :Just as the celestial priests and physicians, the Ashvinis, fire and wind, perform the cosmic yajna of evolution in honour of Indra, universal life energy, and just as Sarasvati, divine creativity, or the enlightened physician, active day and night, creates vital energy with sanative waters and lead and distils the glory for Indra, the soul, from nature, so should the man of yajna perform the sacrifice to the lord supreme for the sake of the soul. And then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from nature, ghee and honey would follow and flow upon the earth. 
1726 :Hota yaksattisro devlrna bhesajam trayastri- dhatavo ’paso rupamindre hiranyayamasvineda na bharati vaca sarasvati maha ’ indray a duha indriyam pay ah somah parisruta ghrtarh madhu vyantvajyasya hotaryaj. 
1727 :Let the man of yajna perform the yajna, invoking three divine powers, Ida, eternal speech and intelligence, Sarasvati, fluent speech, and Bharati, specific intelligence, and let him pray to the Ashvinis, sanative powers of nature, for curative waters of health and longevity (bheshajam). The three as well as the Ashvinis would create threefold balance of health (with sattva, rajas and tamas — intellect, energy and matter—and three humors of vata, pitta, and cough), turn it into a golden form and vest it into Indra, the soul. Thus do the Ashvinis as well as Ida, Sarasvati and Bharati, with speech and energy, create glory and prosperity from nature for the soul. 
1728 :Man of yajna, perform the yajna with ghee, and then milk and delicious drinks, soma distilled from juices, nectars of water and ghee and honey would follow and flow upon the earth. 
1729 :Hota yaksat suretasamrsabham naryapasam tvastaramindramasvina bhisajcuh na sarasvatl- mojo na jutirindriyam vrko na rabhaso bhisag yasah suraya bhesajam sriya na masaram payah somah parisrutd ghrtarh madhu vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 
1730 :Let the man of yajna perform the yajna and invoke the virile, powerful, noble maker and creator Tvashta, destroyer of suffering, Indra, lord of power and majesty, Ashvinis, nature’s energy of wind and electricity, Sarasvati, universal intelligence as well as the physician, all creators and harbingers of health and growth. And like an expert of health he would attain brilliance of health as well as the drive and splendour for living, ardour of movement as well as the lightning of the thunderbolt, honour and reputation as tonics, medicaments with curative waters, and holy food with beauty and grace. And further, delicious drinks and milk, soma distilled as the essence of herbal juices, butter and nectars of waters, and honey would follow and flow upon the earth. 
1731 :Hota yaksad vanaspatim samitaram satakratum bhimarh na many urn rajanam vyaghram namasa ’ svina bhamam sarasvati bhisagindraya duha ’indriyam pay ah somah parisruta ghrtarh madhu vyantvajyasya hotaryaja. 
1732 :Let the man of yajna offer the sacrifice in honour of the lord of sun-rays, Vanaspati, giver of peace, hero of a hundred noble acts of yajna and yet fearsome and passionate, the ruler, majestic as a lion with the thunderbolt. And Ashvinis, nature’s currents of energy (and the president of the assembly and the commander of the army) and Sarasvati, noble intelligence and speech as well as the physician would create righteous anger and dignity for Indra, the ruler. And then all round prosperity, milk and drinks, soma, beauty and grace, nectar-like waters and ghee and honey would follow and flow upon the earth. 
1733 :Man of yajna, perform the yajna with the best of ghee for the ruler. 
1734 :Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of Agni in all sincerity. Let him in truth of word and action offer ghee in a stream of libations. Let him offer libations of fat and meda plant and roots in all sincerity with reverence. Let him faithfully offer sanative and palliative materials for the Ashvinis, protectors of society. Let him work on the clouds and rain with the light of the divine word of knowledge. Let him offer sincere drive and action in the service of the mighty Indra, the ruler. Let him offer money and materials for the strength and perseverance of the human nation in sincerity of word and action. Let him work on agni, heat and fire with love and faith, taking energy as saviour. Let him serve the lord of peace and joy in service of his grace and majesty with full faith. Let him serve Indra, lord of power, saviour and protector, Savita, giver of life and light, Varuna, the supreme lord, and the lord president of all physicians, with all might and honesty. Let him make the oblations for the chief of forests, vegetation and water, a darling friend and fellow traveller, with love, as for a soothing medicine. And all the powers of divinity, lovers, protectors and promoters of food and nourishments, and Agni, lord of light and energy, would bring around restorative and curative medicaments, milk and delicious drinks, soma, the nectar juice distilled from nature, butter and ghee and honey. These would follow and flow upon the earth. 
1735 :Man of yajna, make the yajna offers with the best of ghee. 
1736 :Let the man of yajna, specialized scholar, organize yajna and conferences in the service of the Ashvinis, farmers and cattle breeders. Let them grow by the wool and breeding of goats and the development of rich products such as fats, cream and cheese. May the Ashvinis enjoy the yajna and benefit from it. Man of yajna, carry on the programme with libations of knowledge and investments. 
1737 :Scholar of yajna, organize yajna in the service of Sarasvati, spirit of learning. Let the knowledge of farming and animal husbandry develop with wool and breeding of sheep and the development of fine foods such as cream, butter and ghee. May Sarasvati enjoy and bless the yajna. 
1738 :Man of yajna, carry on the endeavour with rich libations of knowledge and investments. 
1739 :Man of yajna, organize the yajna in the service of Indra, leading power of farming and animal husbandry. Let the breed of the bull and knowledge about dairy farming grow with research on the bull, cows and the development of dairy products such as fat, butter and cheese. May Indra enjoy and bless the yajna. 
1740 :Man of yajna, keep on the yajna with rich libations of knowledge, work and investments. 
1741 :Let the hota, man of yajna, enlightened citizen, perform the yajna of development in honour of the Ashvinis, teachers, preachers and intellectuals, for Sarasvati, voice and motherhood of the nation, in the service of Indra, protective and ruling powers of the land. And here are these soma juices, leaders of rare quality, distilled, that is, selected, elected, prepared and perfected from amongst the people. Joyous they are as if with the wealth of goats, sheep, bulls and cows. Honoured and consecrated they are with shoots of grasses, ears of corn and roasted rice as with children. Inspired they are, seasoned and purified with holy food and nectar-drinks of life. And up-front they are, on their mark, ready for self-sacrifice in the service of humanity. 
1742 :Exhort them, all of you, support them with love and loyalty, and may you and the Ashvinis, Sarasvati and the protector Indra make the best of their service and sacrifice. Replete they are with honey-mead, overflowing, streaming for anyone to taste. May all drink of the soothing and enlightening sweets, may all rejoice and prosper with the wealth of life. 
1743 :Relent not, man of yajna, carry on with the offers of libations. 
1744 :Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of Ashvinis, prana and apana powers of nature and the physicians with the milk and ghee of the goat. Let the Ashvinis partake of the holy food. Let them eat and raise the pranic vitality from the middle part of the body, for sure, before the anti-system forces of ailments take hold of the body and make their home there. And may the Ashvinis delight in protecting and promoting the subtle vitality of the pranas which are ever active in the digestion of food, first in assimilating the assimilable and eliminating the waste, exhilarating, creating a hundred currents of energy, living heat of the system, and essential strength of the body free from obesity. May the Ashvinis protect and promote the vitality expressive from the sides, the back, hyperactive vital parts, weaker and delicate parts, in short, from every vital part of the body system. 
1745 :Man of yajna, offer the holy food in the yajna. 44. (Vidvanso Devata, Svastyatreya Rshi) Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of Sarasvati, divine voice and mother power of enlightenment, with the holy food of sheep’s milk and ghee. May Sarasvati partake of the holy food offered in yajna and raise the pranic vitality from the middle of body before the anti-system forces of ailments take hold of the body and make their home there. And may mother Sarasvati delight in protecting and promoting the subtle vitality of the pranas which are ever active in the digestion of food, first in assimilating the assimilable and throwing out the waste, exhilarating, creating a hundred forms of energy, vital fire of the system, essential strength of the body free from obesity. May Sarasvati protect and promote the vitality expressive and perceptible from the sides, the back, hyperactive vital parts, weaker and delicate parts, in short, from every vital part of the body system. 
1746 :Man of yajna, offer the holy food of yajna to the mother. 
1747 :Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of Indra, wonder and glory of the power of nature and the nation, with the most powerful holy foods of the strength of the bull and the rishabha plant. May Indra partake of the food and raise the pranic vitality of the body-system from the middle of the body, for sure, before the anti-system forces of ailments take hold of the body and make their home there. And may Indra delight in protecting and promoting the subtle vitality of the pranas which are ever active in the digestion of food, first in assimilating the assimilable and eliminating the waste, exhilarating, creating a hundred forms of energy, vital fire of the system, and essential strength of the body free from obesity. May Indra protect and promote the vitality expressed and perceptible from the sides, the back, hyperactive parts, weaker and delicate parts, in short, from every vital part of the body system. 
1748 :TTfWrMI yNfil Ffspf: firm StwlPl FfM\* firm srmtfr w^r: firm srmfbr mr t-iid^ fstm sjmljn ^im| : tor sjimIQ mi t-iidd: Hota yaksad vanaspatimabhi hi pistatamaya rabhisthaya rasanayadhita. Yatrasvino- schagasya havisah priyd dhamani yatra- sarasvatyd mesasya havisah priyd dhamani yatrendrasya ’rsabhasya havisah priyd dhamani yatragneh priyd dhamani yatra somasya priyd dhamani yatrendrasya sutramnah priyd dhamani yatra savituh priyd dhamani yatra varunasya priyd dhamani yatra vanaspateh priyd pathdhsi yatra devdndmdjyapdnarh priyd dhamani yatragnerhotuh priyd dhamani tatraitan prastutye vopastutye vopa- vasraksadrabhiyasa ’ iva krtvi karadevam devo vanspati rj us at am havi rhota ryaja. 
1749 :Let the man of yajna perform the yajna in honour of the lord of forests for love of the forests, herbs and trees. Let him, with the finest, strongest and most inviolable protective zone fence the forest: which is the favourite haunt of the Ashvinis and goats and home of yajnic food; which is lovely resort of Sarasvati and the sheep and the source of holy food; which is the awful seat of Indra and the bull and the giver of sacred food; where abound the favourite resorts of Agni, Soma, the protector Indra, Savita and Varuna; where the noble lovers of divinity seek their nectar in their holy places; where the lord of yajna, Agni, loves to shine and act. 
1750 :And the brilliant man of yajna out there, strongest and most enthusiastic of his mission, may offer songs of inauguration and songs of valediction in his yajna of protection and extension of the forests and these resorts and thereby serve the holy lord of nature and partake of the yajnic gifts. 
1751 :Let the man of yajna perform yajna in honour of Agni, lord of knowledge and energy, which leads energy projects to completion and success. 
1752 :It is Agni which leads to the favourite haunts of the Ashvinis, pranic energies, and the goats and holy foods. 
1753 :It leads to the favourite haunts of Sarasvati, wisdom, and the sheep and holy foods. 
1754 :It leads to the favourite resorts of Indra (majesty), and the bull (power) and holy foods. 
1755 :It leads to the favourite haunts of Agni (energy), to the favourite haunts of Soma (peace and prosperity), to the favourite haunts of Indra, the protector, to the favourite haunts of Savita (inspiration), to the favourite haunts of Varuna (water), to the favourite haunts of the trees and their fruits, to the favourite places of the noble people of piety and protection of the sacred resources, it leads to the favourite homes of Agni, lord of cosmic yajna, it leads to its own grandeur, it creates the means of its own yajnic sacrifice and all the food and energy for life. 
1756 :May the glorious Agni, omniscient light of life, lead all projects of yajna to success. 
1757 :Sarasvati, lady of light and knowledge, offers the seat of honour on the yajna vedi to Indra, noble and brilliant master of the home. The Ashvinis, powers of health and wealth, create the light of the eyes as well as the lustre and splendour of life and vest these in Indra. For the blessed man the powers of divinity create wealth with all the resources of nature and bestow it on the yajnic man of prosperity. 
1758 :The doors of divinity, the Ashvinis, nature’s powers of health, the physicians, and Sarasvati, enlightened woman, open the door, create breath in the nose, vigour and virility, and vest it in Indra, man of sacrifice and power. For the blessed man, the powers of divinity create wealth and bestow it on him to enjoy life through yajna. 
1759 :Man of yajna, keep on with the life of sacrifice and enlightenment. 
1760 :The divine energy of the early dawn and the evening twilight, the protective Ashvinis, health powers of sunlight and the moon-rays, and Sarasvati, enlightened mother spirit of life, with the morningevening cycle of time, bless Indra, man of yajna with strength, noble speech in the mouth as also the lustre of life for glory. Thus, to the blessed man come all the wealths of existence for the enjoyment of life. 
1761 :Man of yajna, live on with the spirit of sacrifice and enlightenment. Relent not ever. 
1762 :The adorable vitality of divine nature, Sarasvati, motherly spirit of enlightenment, and the Ashvinis, wind and electric energy, advance Indra, man of power and lustre, in life by the day-night fortnightly cycle of time through earth and heaven. They bless him with the sense of hearing in the ears and honour and splendour of life. Thus to the blessed man of yajna come the wealths of existence for the enjoyment of life. 
1763 :The beautiful morning and the peaceful evening, generous and blissful, both celebrated with powerful oblations, the Ashvinis, powers of health and enlightenment, the physicians, and Sarasvati, motherly spirit of life, save and protect the man of yajna and bless him with purity of vigour and golden light of the soul in the heart. Thus do they bless Indra fortunate man of yajna with the wealth and splendour of the world and bring him to perfection in life. 
1764 :Noble and brilliant powers of divinity, priests of the noble and generous people, the Ashvinis, learned scholars, the physicians, and Sarasvati, the voice of divinity, with Vashatkara hymns by the priests of yajna, vest Indra, lustrous man of yajna, with divine light and lightning energy in the heart as well as intelligence in the mind. Thus do they bring wealth of the world and splendour of life to the man of yajna and perfect him in his desire and ambition. 
1765 :Three brilliant and divine powers, Ida, divine speech, Sarasvati, divine universal intelligence, and Bharati, specific energies of nature in various forms, and these three, further, alongwith the Ashvinis, complementary currents of universal energy, hold strength and splendour for the soul and infuse it into the middle of the body-system by the navel for the soul’s perfection. 
1766 :May all the divine powers come and make the energy and wealth of the world flow into the blessed man of yajna. 
1767 :The brilliant Indra universally sung and celebrated, residing in the three worlds of heaven, earth and the sky, wondrous warrior of the chariot, is reached through Sarasvati, divine speech and the Ashvinis, circuitous powers of nature. Tvashta, divine maker of forms, creates the vital creative energy as well as the immortal form, senses and the sense organs for Indra and vests these in him. May Tvashta, Sarasvati and the Ashvinis create the wealth of the world for Indra, blessed man of honour and power, and vest the same in him. 
1768 :Man of yajna, perform the yajna in honour of the divinities. 
1769 :The lord of light, guardian of nature, self- refulgent, of golden hue, generous and fruitful, matures the honey sweets of fruits and vegetables for Indra, the soul, with Sarasvati, constant flow of energy, the rays of light, and the Ashvinis, heat and water. And thus, the sun, the tree, and the forest chief create and hold for us lustre of life as well as speed of action, and passion as much as vitality of life. May all the wealth and power of body and mind come to the man who loves them through yajna. 
1770 :Man of yajna, move on with the creative life of sacrifice. 
1771 :Indra, noble soul, soft as wool and blessed is your seat in the yajna covered with watery grasses and the light of heaven spread by Sarasvati, spirit divine, and the Ashvinis, currents of energy. May your yajnic seat and home and the lights of heaven create holy and splendid passion of the mind for you for the sake of honour and glory. May all the wealth of the world come to the man of sacred desire and work through yajna. 
1772 :Man of yajna, carry on the endeavour, neglect not the sacrifice. 
1773 :For the man of yajnic endeavour in search of honour and success in the world, the Divine Agni, lord of light and life, generous giver of all round success, does universal yajna with the divinities of nature such as the earth in appropriate manner. The Ashvinis, wind and electric energy, both high-priests of nature, act in yajna with Indra, the sun. With the energy of universal sound, they work with Sarasvati, the dynamics of nature. They work on agni, fire, and soma, the moon, both powers of universal success. Indra, lord protector of the world, Savita, the sun, Varuna, universal waters, the physician, the generous and all-loved tree, the dear powers of nature which feed on the food of yajna, and all-loved vital heat—all these work with the universal fire for the creation of wealth and energy. 
1774 :Thus any versatile performer of yajna (individual, social and natural) has the secret of success and creates honour, glory, energy and fame for the dedicated souls. 
1775 :May all the powers of yajna create and carry the wealth of the world for the man of yajna. 
1776 :Let the yajamana to-day, cooking the yajna offerings and preparing the oblations, select Agni as the high-priest and as the deity. The devotees rear and bind the goat for milk and butter for the Ashvinis, prana and apana energy, sheep for Sarasvati, universal intelligence, and the bull for Indra, honour and lustre, and they extract and distil the exhilarating soma drink for the Ashvins, Sarasvati and the protector Indra, the ruler. 
1777 :Soothing and joyous is the yajna post to day as a mark of valediction. For the Ashvinis, prana and apana energy, milk of the goat! For Sarasvati, speech and intelligence, milk of the sheep! For Indra, honour and grandeur in life, let us rejoice with the strength and vigour of the bull! Let all enjoy the fine foods cooked with cream and butter and let all grow strong on specially seasoned foods and delicacies. May the Ashvinis, teachers, intellectuals and physicians, Sarasvati, enlightened woman, and Indra, protector and ruler and leader, all celebrate with the exciting drink of soma. 
1778 :Tvamadya ’rsa ’arseya ’rsindrh napadavnutdyam yajamano bahubhya’a sahgatebhya’esa me devesu vasu varyayaksyata ’id ta yd deva deva dananyadustanyasma ’a ca sasva ca gurasvesitasca hotarasi bhadravacydya presito mdnusah suktavakaya sukta bruhi. 
1779 :O Rishi, seer blest, child of the Rishis and the tradition of the Rishis: of the many noble sages assembled here to-day, this yajamana opts for you, saying: “This sage among the generous and brilliant ones would gain for us the consecrated shower of wealth and vision.” Noble sage, give unto us of those gifts which the divinities have granted, pray for us, raise us and keep up the tradition. 
1780 :Hota, man of yajna, you are the man inspired and sent to pronounce the sacred Word and sing the hymns of divinity. Pray, speak the Word, sing the hymns of praise. 
1781 :Light of life, you are the power and glory of the world, the passion and purity of life, and the spirit and immortality of existence. Guardian and protector of life, protect and promote the life for me. In the world of Lord Savita’s creation, I dedicate myself to you with nature’s currents of energy and the solar gifts of health and vitality. 
1782 :Imamagrbhnan rasanamrtasya purva ’ayusi vidathesu kavya. Sd no ’asmintsuta ’a babhuva ’ rtasya saman tsa rama rap an ti. 
1783 :The seers of the earliest time of creation in their communion receive and realise the chain of cause and effect from the first vibration of the original cause (Ritam) to the last and closing silence. And the same, in this world of ours, has become the whispering voice of the whole truth of existence to us (in the Veda). 
1784 :You are the preceptor and teacher. You are the realized soul. You are the guide. You are the support and preserver of the knowledge and the law. Yajamana, initiated and consecrated by the sacred acts of yajna, take up, research and realize Agni, omnipresent vitality of the world, expansive and infinite. 
1785 :Man of knowledge, scholar of divinity and the Veda, I consecrate you as free independent researcher in the service of the noblest powers of the world and the ruler-guardian of the people. 
1786 :I shall control powerful energy like a horse for the noblest powers and the ruler-guardian of the people. I shall thereby realise the mission of my life. 
1787 :Bind and control energy for the divinities and the ruler-guardian and thereby realise the mission of your life. 
1788 :Dedicated as you are, scholar, to Prajapati, I consecrate you. Dedicated to Indra and Agni, the soul and energy, I consecrate you. Dedicated to Vayu, wind energy, I consecrate you. Dedicated to divinities of the world, I consecrate you. Dedicated to all nobilities, I consecrate you. Who ever does violence to the horsepower, energy and the nation, the supreme lord Varuna punishes him, the best man too takes him on. The killer is worse than the worst man. He is worse than a dog. 
1789 :knowledge, light and fire energy; all the best action and commitment for Soma, health and medication; all the best investment and action for the Apah, development of water resources; all the best action and dedication for Savita, solar energy; all the best action and dedication for Vayu, wind energy; all the best action and dedication to Vishnu, universal electric energy; all the best action and dedication for Indra, development of the self; all the best action and care for Brihaspati, guardian of the elderly; all the best for Mitra, spirit of friendship and cooperation; all the best action and care for Varuna, best personalities. 
1790 :Reverence to the singer of Samans, reverence to him who has done the singing, reverence to the loud challenger, reverence to the soft singer, reverence to the man of accomplishment, reverence to the specialist, value for fragrance, welcome to the fragrant, reverence to the securely seated, reverence to the close-by friends and yogis in posture, thanks for what is well-given, reverence for the one on the move, reverence for the sitting, reverence for the sleeping, care for the one in deep sleep, welcome to the waking one, love for the humming one, rest for the yawning one, reverence for the shining, reverence for the strong and well-built, reverence for the close neighbours, reverence for the knowledgeable, reverence for the scholars of special knowledge. (Those who welcome, respect and reverence the others are fortunate and blessed.) All hail and reverence for the man of endeavour, running, advancing, flying high, acting promptly, and for the man who has achieved instant success and accomplishment. Reverence to the man who is of stable mind, of high values, speed and strength. Reverence to the man who is expansive, and has achieved advancement and peace. Reverence for the agitative and sympathy for the shaken. Welcome and reverence for the man who wants to listen and is listening, for the man who is watching, who is watched, and who is watched and guarded for security reasons. Reverence for the yogi with closed eyes. Reverence for any one who eats and drinks and who removes the waste of the system. Reverence to the man who is doing the job and to the one who has done and calls it a day. 
1791 :(Those who honour the men of action and accomplishment find recognition peace and happiness.) Let us concentrate and meditate on the glory and blazing splendour of Lord Savita, worthy of our choice and worship, who may, we pray, inspire and enlighten our mind and soul. 
1792 :For the sake of inspiration and self-protection, I invoke and worship Lord Savita, creator and sustainer who wields the glorious lights of the world. Lord of light and omniscience, He is the giver of light and knowledge, and He is the ultimate goal and haven of all. 
1793 :We worship and pray for the great truth-bearing divine wisdom of the brilliant and blazing omniscient Lord Savita, creator and sustainer of the world. We pray, meditate and internalize. 
1794 :For the seeker of light and lover of wisdom, we pray for the generous gift of the grace of Lord Savita who is the creator of the world and promoter of noble intelligence and wisdom for mankind. 
1795 :I invoke, praise, worship and meditate upon the generous and glorious Savita, Lord creator and fatherly guardian of the living creatures for the attainment of sagely company, noble virtues and divine grace. 
1796 :With all our intelligence we pray for the great and generous lord Savita’s omniscience and with our mind and soul meditate upon His glorious and universal grandeur of divinity. 
1797 :Man of yajna lighting the immortal Agni, divine fire in the vedi with holy fuel, feed it with holy foods and fragrances, and expand it with holy chants of hymns, so that it may create and carry among the divinities of nature such as the air and the sky rich materials of the wealth of life for the devotees. 
1798 :That Agni, brilliant, immortal, radiant power, carrier and begetter of holy foods and wealths of life for nature and humanity is attained through intelligent and dedicated action. 
1799 :Fire is the fastest catalytic agent of nature. It is the creator and carrier of the holy foods for life. I light and place the fire up front in the Vedi and pray that it may bring us the blessings of divinity in this life. 
1800 :Agni, universal energy, pure and purifying, faster than light, flowing as well as omnipresent, you create and hold the sun and, as is mission of the cow and the earth, with your own actions, bear the waters of sustenance for existence. 
1801 :Agni, universal energy of life and the world, you are immence and abundant as mother like the earth, preeminent and super-guardian as father like the sky. You attain to everything; self-impelled you impel everything; you are constant ever, and ever on the move; you are ever at peace and ever fresh; you reach everywhere; you are the way to love and honour; you are fast and impetuous; you are generous like a shower; kind, reaching everyone’s heart. Surely, you are the way to final beatitude and worthy of meditation. Ever new as reborn, you make the time fly with the motion of the stars. Come and be with us here. 
1802 :Guardians of the earth in all directions, serve and save this consecrated power for the noble people and the environment in the interest of national growth. Here is peace and pleasure, let it stay while you enjoy. Here is stability and constancy. Here is self-dependence and self- realisation. 
1803 :Homage in honest thought, word and deed: to Prajapati, lord giver of peace and comfort, who Himself is peace and joy in the essence, who is the exceptional Being among the infinite beings in existence; homage to the scholar of wider learning; to the lord present in the mind; to the lord who knows the depths of the unconscious; to the mother earth; to the divine speech; to the kind and loving mother; to the streams and rivers; to the fluent speech that purifies the mind; to the universal speech in the universal mind; to the wind that sustains life; to the energy that freshens and restores life; to the universal teacher of humanity; to the lord creator and giver of light; to the lord giver of life and speed across life; to the lord maker of many forms; to the lord omnipresent, protector of existence, and present in the depths of intelligence and in the unconscious. 
1804 :Let all mankind, with truth of thought, word and action, dedicate themselves to the love and friendship of the lord and light of existence. Let them all try for the wealth of the world and choose wealth and honour for the sake of growth and advancement in life. 
1805 :(Republic) of ours, let the Brahmanas rise as a community of brilliant men of divinity and illustrious scholars of universal knowledge. Let the Kshatriyas rise as a force of heroic warriors of the chariot and routers of the enemy with unfailing arrows. May the cows be fertile and abundant in milk, the oxen, carriers of heavy load, the coursers, swift, the women, kind and generous; and may the children (people) of this yajamana, the ruler, be brave and fearless, victorious riders of the chariot, and youthful and civilized members of the council. 
1806 :May the clouds rain in showers for us according to the need of the seasons. May the herbs and trees mature and ripen with abundant fruit. And may this land be securely blest with a ceaseless cycle of growth and protection of happiness and prosperity. 
1807 :For prana and apana (breath in and out), yoga exercise; for vyana, systemic energy of the whole body, expert counselling; for the eye, training in direct observation and proof; for the ear, word of the wise; for the speech (tongue), love of truth; for the mind, thought and meditation. 
1808 :Pursue the science of Astronomy and the literature on the subject in right earnest for the knowledge of: the eastern direction from the horizon to the near-most point; the south-eastern direction from the farthest to the nearest point; the south direction from the farthest to the nearest point; the south-western direction from the farthest to the nearest point; the western direction from the farthest to the nearest point; the north western direction from the farthest to the nearest point; the north direction from the farthest to the nearest point; the north eastern direction from the farthest to the nearest point; the direction above from the highest to the lowest point; and the direction below from the farthest to the nearest point (where you are). 
1809 :For sacrificial waters, filtering and cleansing; for selected and controlled waters, watchful management; for fresh and spring waters, proper protection; for standing waters, safety from pollution and proper treatment with chemicals; for streaming waters, safety from waste discharge; for the rushing waters, control and management; for the well-waters, flow out and cleaning; for cooking and yajna waters, cleaning and sanctification; for conducted as well as rain waters, security and proper control; for space waters, research and environment control; for the oceans, knowledge of tides and preservation of nature; for the surging and fluctuating waters, proper management and grid-control. This is the honest action in truth and dedication. 
1810 :Perform yajna for the purification, treatment and management of the air and wind, smoke and smog, the mist, the rainy cloud, the lightning cloud, the thundering cloud, the hailing cloud, the raining cloud, the pouring cloud, the bursting cloud, the vapour-holding cloud, the held up vapours, the refreshing rain, the rain that irrigates, the rain that is full and flourishing, the roaring cloud, and the frost and freezing rain. 
1811 :Let us perform yajna for the heat and vitality of life, for the peace and waters of life, for the energy and power of the soul, for the earth, the middle regions of the sky, and heaven and the regions of light, for the directions of space, for the inter directions, and for the upper and lower directions of space. 
1812 :Let us perform yajna and do our best for the stars and planets and their part in nature, the day-night cycle, the fortnights, the months, the seasons and their part in nature, the year, the heaven and earth, the moon, the sun, the rays of light, the Vasu sustainers of life, the Rudra sustainers of pranic energy, the solar zodiacs of time, the winds, all the divine powers of nature, the roots, the branches, the herbs and trees, the flowers, fruits and medicinal plants. 
1813 :regions of the sky, the heaven of light, the sun, the moon, the stars, the waters, the medicinal plants, the trees, all those that swim and float, those that move and don’t move and all those that creep. 
1814 :Let us perform yajna in homage to the energy of prana, the soul residing in the body, the universal energy, the lord giver of light, the electric energy that provides for the beauty of existence, the air that sustains the forms of life in nature, the heat energy that is always close at hand, the ruler president of the human community, the powers of defence, whatever glides or creeps silently, the moon and beauty of life, the light, the darkness, and the lord of the day, the sun. 
1815 :Let us perform yajna for the service and enrichment of the romantic spring month of Chaitra, the charming month of Vaishakha, the cleansing month of Jyeshtha, the brilliant and purifying month of Ashadha, the generous and showering month of Shravana, the misty and foggy month of Bhadrapada, the food-producing month of Ashvina, the feeding and energising month of Kartika, the strengthening and vigorous month of Marga-Shirsha, the most powerful endurable Pausha, the austere month of Magha, the month of observance of vows and austerities, Phalguna, and the intercalary month which is the lord over sin and perplexity. 
1816 :Let us perform yajna for the sake of food and energy, procreation, children and family, intelligence and action, happiness, intellect and purity of thought, universal vitality, the ultimate lord of existence, the ultimate reduction of existence which is prakriti, the transcendent lord of creation, Brahma, and and the father and guardian of the living beings, Prajapati. 
1817 :May life grow by yajna and be dedicated, may prana energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may apana energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may vyana energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may udana energy grow by yajna and be dedicated, may the ear and hearing grow by yajna and be dedicated, may the speech and all other senses of volition grow by yajna and be dedicated, may the mind grow by yajna and yoga and be dedicated, may the soul grow by yajna and yoga and be dedicated to the lord of life and existence, may the knowledge of Veda and the man of knowledge grow by yajna and meditation and be dedicated, may the light of knowledge and the spirit grow by yajna and be dedicated to divine service, may the heavenly joy of the soul grow by yajna and be dedicated to the Divine, may the ultimate question and desire of the soul be answered and fulfilled by yajna and divine grace and be surrendered to the Divine. May the yajna of life and age grow to completion by constant yajna and meditation and terminate in the interminable and infinite divine super-existence, which is the last oblation of existential yajna. 
1818 :By yajna in truth of thought, word and deed, homage and surrender to the One, Supreme Soul of the universe. Homage to the two, Purusha, the supreme spirit, and Prakriti, one the efficient cause and the other the material cause of the world. Homage to the hundred (years of life and countless things). Homage to the hundred (years of life) and the one beyond. Homage to the fire, the reckoning and the dawn. Homage to Svarga, the joy of the next world. 
1819 :The Great Golden Egg, the mighty original womb of the lights of the world such as the sun and moon, exists by Himself before the world comes into existence. He is the sole lord manifest, preserver, creator and guardian of the world of forms. He holds this earth and Heaven, and to that lord of bliss and majesty we offer our homage and worship with the surrender of our mind and soul. 
1820 :Lord of this great universe, through the discipline of yoga you are realized and consecrated in the heart and soul, and loved in faith for the sake of Prajapati, protector and guardian of the people. I accept and surrender to you. 
1821 :This Prakriti and the world of forms is your seat of immanence. The sun is the manifestation of your grandeur. The glory of yours which manifests in the day and in the year, the glory which manifests in the air and in the sky, the glory which manifests in the sun and in heaven, to that glory and to you we offer our homage and worship for the sake of Prajapati, guardian of the people, and the devas, noble and generous powers of nature and humanity. 
1822 :The sole one lord who, with His own might, creates and rules over the world of those who breathe and see, the lord who mles over men and animals, to that sovereign lord of bliss and majesty we offer our homage and worship with our heart and soul. 
1823 :Lord of the universe, seated and consecrated you are in the heart. Loved and worshipped you are in faith. I surrender to you for the sake of Prajapati, protector and guardian of the people. 
1824 :This world is your space of immanence and omnipotence. The moon is the symbol of your glory. The grandeur of yours which manifests in the night and in the year, the generosity of yours which manifests in the earth and in the universal fire vitality, the glory of yours which manifests in the stars and in the moon, to that glory of yours and to you we offer our homage and worship for the sake of Prajapati and the noble and brilliant powers of nature and humanity. 
1825 :Those who join their mind and soul to the great and glorious presence of God vibrating like electric energy in the moving and non-moving forms of existence, shine like the sunlight in heaven. 
1826 :Just as they yoke to the chariot two strong, handsome, reddish horses worthy of ride by men and loved by all, so do the yogis join their senses, mind and soul to Ishvara, lord and light of the world. 
1827 :(So do the scientists use the carrier currents of solar and electric energy, i.e., the energy of Surya/sun and Indra/electricity, in the service of humanity for the divine purpose.) O man of the science-mantra, the celestial horse, mighty carrier, flies across the waters of the sky and the wondrous oceans of space on the wings of the winds. The same horse, by the same paths of energy, you bring us back and take us round. 
1828 :Prajapati, guardian and protector of the people, may the scholars of the Vasu order of twenty-four years celebrate you with the joy of the gayatri verses. May the scholars of the Rudra order of thirty-six years enlighten you with the knowledge of the trishtubh verses. May the scholars of the Aditya order of forty- eight years beatify you with the vision of the jagati verses. Receive the homage and be pleased by this celebration. 
1829 :Brilliant men of knowledge and vision, take the food from the fields of barley and milk of the cow and reach across the regions of the earth to the sky and the heavens orbiting in their own courses in space. 
1830 :is bom again (in another’s light)? What is the antidote of cold? What is the great field for the sowing of seeds and the great store for things? The sun moves alone (self-lighted, on its own axis). The moon is born again (in the light of the sun). Fire is the antidote of cold. The earth is the great field for the sowing of seeds (and the great store-house of things, with its gravity). 
1831 :What is the first object of perception and thought? What is the great bird of motion? What is soft, smooth and beautiful? What is it that devours light and form? Heaven is the first object of perception and thought. Energy, electricity and light, is the greatest bird of motion. Protective mother earth is soft, smooth and beautiful. The night of darkness devours light and forms. 
1832 :Seeker of knowledge, may the air protect you with maturation and perfection. May the fire nourish and protect you with the milk of goats. May the banyan tree strengthen and protect you with ladlefuls of juice. May the shalmali plant protect and advance you with growth. May this strong and virile chariot horse on its four legs carry you forward on your journey. 
1833 :Brahma, brilliant star of knowledge, guide and protect us. All homage, respect and support for Agni, light of knowledge and yajna. 
1834 :The chariot is refined by the light of sunbeams. The horse is refined by sensitive reins of steering. The expert man of knowledge born of the energy of prana, working on energy, is refined by advancement in the knowledge of health, peace and value of honour. 
1835 :Man of knowledge, seeker of advancement, develop your self by yourself. Do the yajna of joint work by your own choice. Serve the scholars and society by yourself. Your eminence and value must not be destroyed by others. 
1836 :Man of knowledge and yajna, you go to meet with the seers and sages by the straight and right paths of truth. Die you shall not, nor your value diminish. 
1837 :Where dwell the men of right action and where they realize lasting peace and joy, there may Savita, lord of light and life, establish you. 
1838 :Agnih pasurasit tenayajanta sa’etamllokam- ajayad yasminnagnih sa te loko bhavisyati tarn jesyasi pibaitd’apah. Vayuh pasurasit tenayajanta sa ’etamllokamajayadyasminvayuh sa te loko bhavisyati tain jesyasi pibaitd ’apah. Suryah pasurasit tenayajanta sa etamllokam- ajayad yasmintsuryah sa te loko bhavisyati tarii jesyasi pibaitd ’apah. 
1839 :Agni, fire, is the soul of yajna, a direct participant. The divines perform yajna with agni. Who ever does the yajna with agni wins the sphere where agni is supreme. The same will become your sphere too, you would conquer it if you do yajna. Drink deep at the fount of knowledge and joy purified by agni. 
1840 :Vayu, wind, is the soul of yajna, a seer and participant. The divines perform yajna by vayu. Whoever does the yajna by vayu wins the sphere where vayu is supreme. The same will become your sphere too, you would conquer it if you do yajna. Drink deep at the fount of breath and energy purified by vayu. 
1841 :Surya, the sun, is the soul of yajna, a seer and participant. The divines perform yajna with the sun. Whoever does the yajna with the sun wins the sphere where the sun is supreme. The same will become your sphere too, you would win it if you do yajna. Drink deep at the fount of light and energy purified by the sun. 
1842 :Best of thought, word and action in truth for prana, for apana and for vyana, the energy of breath, the energy for systemic cleansing, and the overall health and vitality of the body system. 
1843 :Mother, grand-mother, and great-grand-mother, none can retain and sustain me or anyone in the splendid good fortune and peaceful settled seat of the man of prosperity, who, though he might have been as fast and impetuous as a war-horse, goes to sleep in sloth after getting the wealth and comfort. 
1844 :protective fatherly presence over all the groups, communities and republics of the world. Such as you are, we accept, realise and surrender unto you. 
1845 :You are the darling life-giver and protector of all things of existence which are so dear to you. We recognise, realise and worship you in love and faith. 
1846 :You are the giver, protector and promoter of all the wealths of the world. We surrender to you in worship and gratitude and pray to you for all the wealth, prosperity and happiness of life. 
1847 :Lord omnipresent in every particle of existence, every particle of existence exists in you. You are my haven and home too. You are the father of all forms of existence. I pray that I may know you, the father, that I may know Prakriti, the mother; and that I may know all the forms of existence, as you do. 
1848 :Let both of them, the ruler and the people, protect and support each other. May both realise and extend the four values of life: Dharma, righteous living, Artha, worldly well-being, kama, self-fulfilment, and Moksha, ultimate freedom. May the ruler, wielder of power, swift in action and advancement, strengthen the people with power, and the people, in return, strengthen the ruler with power. 
1849 :O Ruler, man of strength and power, if there is anyone evil who plays with the life and honour of women, punish him. Establish peace among the people. Establish the rule of law. Eliminate immorality and wantonness from the state. 
1850 :Where the ruler strikes at the people, he strikes at the nation and the state because there the people, though otherwise they enjoyed comfort and happiness before, grow weaker and weaker now and fade like a helpless bird. When such a ruler exacts taxes from the farmers, he only cheats the nation. 
1851 :no false promises to us. Let your mouth be not like a boaster’s. If you tell lies, you will grow weaker and weaker like a helpless bird and end up, cheating yourself. 
1852 :Mata ca te pita ca te ’ gram vrksasya rohatah. Pratilamiti te pita gabhe mustimataihsayat. 
1853 :Ruler, the earth your mother and the sun your father rise to the top of the world. The sun strikes at the treasure of space-waters with his light and power, the earth receives the showers and shines. Celebrate them with the people in yajna: It is beautiful, it is joyous. I am happy. 
1854 :Mata ca te pita ca te’gre vrksasya kridatah. Vivaksata’iva te mukham brahman ma tvam vado bahu. 
1855 :People of the land, your mother-land like the earth and the ruler, father of the nation, like the sun, both joyous, play on top of the world in the midst of beauty and prosperity. Ruler, Brahma, presiding priest of the national yajna, your mouth seems eager to shout with pride and joy. At that time, speak not much, control yourself. 
1856 :Ruler of the land, lead this rising nation to the heights of beauty and prosperity like a mountaineer bearing his banner to the top of the mount, and, in the midst of this people, being sanctified as if in the cool mountain breezes, move on higher and ever higher. 
1857 :Man of knowledge, enlightened citizen, support this rising ruler to the height of glory and power as a mountaineer carrying his burden to the top of the mount, and, in the midst of this nation, and sifting the truth from falsehood, as if, in the cool breeze, shine on in the beauty and prosperity of the land. 
1858 :When the small and great acts of the people who clear out sin and crime from the society are appreciated by the ruler and the enlightened officers, they, the ruler and the elite, captivate the heart of the people and they shine in their eyes as shakula fish shine in a little pool of water. 
1859 :Just as noble people approach an eminent and reasonable judge for justice, just as a woman is distinguished by her body, so the men of reason find out the truth by direct observation of evidence. 
1860 :When the deer eats up the barley it does not care for the field but destroys it. A servant woman who is the mistress of her master loves money but not for the well-being of her master or of her family. So when a ruler exploits his people, he does not care for their wellbeing, he destroys the nation. 
1861 :crop and the field. The servant who is a paramour of his mistress cares not for the well-being of the family. The ruler who exploits the people destroys the nation. 
1862 :The hero is on guard, holding and protecting the land and people. Like a knight of horse panting for victory, fast advancing in the battle, I place him at the head of the nation. May he do us proud, holding our head high gracefully, and may he carry us across the field of life. 
1863 :May the scholars with research and action perfect and stabilize you in peace and tranquillity with the joyous gayatri, the stable trishtup, the protective anushtup, the comprehensive pankti, the expansive brihati, the lovely ushnih, and the charming kakup verses of the Veda. 
1864 :O citizens of the nation, may the learned and the wise, with their knowledge and acts, perfect and stabilise you in peace and tranquillity with two-part, four-part, three-part, or six-part, or various or regular verses of the Veda. 
1865 :Seekers of knowledge, citizens of the nation, may the universal words of wisdom, golden rich, great and sublime, ringing in all directions, raining like the clouds, roaring like thunder, and blazing as lightning — may all these great voices perfect you with their integrative and elevating message of peace and stability. 
1866 :Ruler, citizens, teachers, may the women, virgins and wives of the noble people, protectors of the nation, listen and gather your words with care and understanding, and may they, like the pure transparent quarters of space, stabilise and perfect you with their integrative words Women in love, lovely, captivating, arresting with love and loyalty, exciting and dedicated, are joined in marriage to the protection and embrace of handsome, virile and generous young men by their own will and action. Bound in the discipline of matrimony, may they be at peace in security, and may they provide for the love, peace and security of the young men of their choice. 
1867 :Kuvidahga yavamanto yavancidyatha dantyanu- purx’am viyuya. Ihehaisam krnuhi bhojanani ye bar hi so nama ’ uktim yajanti. 
1868 :Dear Sabhasad, eminent member of the council, just as farmers blest with rich barley harvest the grain with discrimination, some plants separately and some together, so do the teachers sit on seats of grass, receive food and water, and carry on the yajna of education accomplishing their work with the disciples with judgement. Here in this school, provide for their food and maintenance. 
1869 :Kastva chyati lzastva visasti kaste gat rani samyati. Ka u te samita kavih. 
1870 :Young learner, who cuts, grinds and shapes you into form? Who teaches, directs and controls you? Who exercises your body-parts to suppleness and equipoise? Who is the sage and seer, high-priest of your education, giving the last oblation of completion? Learner, seeker of knowledge and expertise, may the seasons and the teachers training you in peace and action instruct and temper you according to the needs of the time and the stage of your life, and may they complete and perfect you with the splendour of the sun round the year and peaceable action and refinement. 
1871 :nights, fortnights and months developing you refine and strengthen your body parts and life’s periods, and may the learned soften your roughness and eliminate your hardness. 
1872 :Learner, seeker, mler, citizen, may the divine high- priests of the yajna and development of the nation instmct and refine you and develop the parts of your body, life and community from every joint and transition onward. May the loving motherly women wholly dedicated soften your heart and refine your mind. 
1873 :May the heaven (with its light), the earth (with his generosity and stability), the sky (with its expanse), the wind and air (with speed and energy) make up your wants and repair your weaknesses. And may the sun, lord of light and life, with the stars and planets, create for you a straight and simple world of beauty, freedom and progress. 
1874 :Peace and health to the higher parts of your personality. Peace and health to the lower parts of your body. Peace and strength to your bones and marrow. Peace and well-being to your body and mind all over. 
1875 :Who moves alone? Who is born again and again? What is the antidote of cold? And what is the great field and hold of life, seed and sustenance? The sun moves alone. The moon is born again and again. Fire, heat, is the antidote of cold. And earth is the great field and hold of life, seed and sustenance. 
1876 :What is the other light like the sun? What is the vessel-hold of water like the sea? What is larger than the earth? What is without limits in the world? Brahma is the light like the sun. The sky is the great vessel-hold of waters like the sea. The sun is greater than the earth. Word, divine speech, has no limits. 
1877 :Friend of the divine, I ask you for my understanding, if with your mind you can reach the answer: Does the living world exist in those three regions of the universe — the earth, the sky, and the heavens, wherein Vishnu, universal lord of the world, pervades? I am there, sure, in those three regions of the universe wherein the whole living world exists. I instantly and universally pervade the earth, the sky and the vault of heaven, each with one existential part of my omnipresence. 
1878 :Who and how many does the Purusha, supreme spirit, pervade? Who and how many reside in the Purusha? This, O man of knowledge, we ask you so that we too may excel. What do you say to us on this question? In five (elements of Prakriti) does the Purusha pervade. These five elements reside within the Purusha. This I say on the question believing and asking you to accept and believe. Not by maya, nor by mere science, nor by knowledge alone of existence would you go farther than me (the Purusha). 
1879 :What is the first original structure in time? What is the great womb of the forms of life? What is the finest pliant material? What is the universal devourer? Heaven, light, i.e., divine vibration of thought energy is the first original step in creation. Mahat, the first mutation of original Prakriti, was the great womb of the forms of creation. Manifested Prakriti is the finest pliant material for creation. Pralaya, the night of annihilation devours the universe. 
1880 :What is the cover of the forms of existence? Who destroys the beauty of the crops? Who moves jumping in leaps? Who creeps on the path? Prakriti is the cover of forms. Porcupine is the destroyer of the beauty of crops in the field. Energy moves in currents. And the clouds sail upon their path. 
1881 :How many permanent materials? How many operations? How many fuels and modes of lighting? I ask you these questions on the subject of yajna for knowledge. How many priests perform it according to the seasons? Six seasons are the pillars of yajna. Hundreds are the materials of permanent nature. Eighty are the operations. Three are the fuels. I speak to you of the knowledge of yajna. Seven priests carry on the yajna according to the seasons. 
1882 :Ko’asya veda bhuvanasya nabhim ko dyavci- prthivVantariksam. Kah suryasya veda brhato janitram ko veda candramasaih yatojah. 
1883 :Who knows the centre-hold of this world? Who knows the earth, the sky, and the heaven, region of light? Who knows the great creator of the sun? Who knows the moon and wherefrom it was born? I know the centre-hold of this world. I know the heaven and earth and the middle regions of the sky. I know the great creator of the sun. I know the moon and wherefrom it was born. (The man of real knowledge is one who knows Brahma, creator and sustainer of the world, and the world itself, who knows the efficient cause, Brahma, and the material cause, Prakriti, and the beneficiary, the jiva. The speaker is such a man of knowledge. Alternatively, the speaker is Brahma Itself.) I ask you: What is the highest end of the earth and where? I ask you: What and where is the centre of the world? I ask you: Where and what is the seed of the virility and fertility of the male? I ask you: What and where is the haven and home and ultimate preserve of the Word, universal speech? This yajna-vedi is the supreme and ultimate end of the earth. This yajna is the centre and centre-hold of the world. This soma is the seed and source of the virility and fertility of the male. And Brahma is the haven and home and birth and preserve of the Word, divine speech. 
1884 :Gracious and glorious, self-existent and at the very centre in this grand ocean of the universe is Brahma. He plants the seed of creation into Prakriti according to the season of the creative cycle, and thence is bom Prajapati, the sun, lord of life. 
1885 :The man of yajna performs the yajna in honour of Prajapati, father and sustainer of the world of creation by the grace and glory of Soma, lord of life and omnipotence. May he ever dedicate himself to the lord and drink the nectar of life and immortality by divine grace. 
1886 :Prajapati, lord of creation, no one other than you is supreme over and beyond all these and other forms of existence. 
1887 :Whatever our ends and aims for which we offer our homage to you, may all that come true for us. 
1888 :May we, by Grace, be masters, promoters and preservers of the wealths of the world. 
1889 :The horse, the wild ram, the wild cow, these are sunny in character and quality, they belong to Prajapati; the black-necked animal foremost among the beasts is fiery in character and quality, it belongs to Agni; the sheep with twisted hair in the forehead has the quality for speech and intelligence, it belongs to Sarasvati; the goats having black spots below the jaws and on the lower parts of front legs have the qualities of the sun and moon, they belong to the Ashvinis; the animal which is black round the navel has the qualities of Soma and Pushan; the qualities of the sun and air, they belong to Surya and Yama; those with long hair on the thighs have the qualities of Tvashta; the small animal and the barren cow belong to Vishnu; Let all these be deployed in the service of Indra, the ruler, man of high values and action. 
1890 :The red, smoky red and red-berry animals belong to Soma; the brown, red brown and parrot brown belong to Varuna; those with white holes in the wool on the one side or all over belong to Savita; those with spots on the limbs, small ones, or large ones, belong to Mitra and Varuna. 
1891 :The animals with bright hair, wholly bright hair, and jewel-bright hair belong to the Ashvins. The white, the white eyed, and the red ones are for Rudra, lord of the animals. Those which are specially serviceable belong to Yama. Those of strong limbs belong to the pranas. And those which are sky-grey belong to the clouds. 
1892 :Soft and dappled ones, those with transverse speckles, or upward speckles are of the quality and character of the Maruts; fruit-lovers, those with red hair, and those of quick quivering eyes belong to Sarasvati. The spleen-eared, white-eared, and the golden eared belong to Tvashta. Those of black neck, white flanks and heavy thighs are of the quality and character of Indra and Agni, wind and electric energy. And those of average or dark brilliance, little brilliance or great brilliance belong to the dawns. 
1893 :The animals useful in arts belong to all the noble people, all the divinities. Three kinds of mountain sheep used in climbing high are for knowledge and speech. The unknown breeds are for Aditi, the earth. Those of similar form are for the Protector, and the young calves are for the wives of the learned to look after. 
1894 :Black-necked animals have the quality and character of fire. Those with white brows are of the Vasus such as earth. The red ones are of the quality and energy of pranas. The white ones and brilliant ones are of the nature of Adityas. And those of the colour of water and the sea are of the element of the clouds. 
1895 :The tall, strong animals with supple and tortuous limbs are of the quality Indra and Vishnu, electricity and wind. The tall ones of razor-sharp stroke and adamantine back have the quality of Indra and Brihaspati, wind and the sun. Those of the form and colour of the parrot, fast as horse, white and black have the quality of Agni and Maruts, fire and the winds. The black ones have the quality of Pushan, energising as the cloud. 
1896 :These animals of two colours or qualities are of the nature of Indra and Agni, wind and electric energy. Those of supple and tortuous limbs and the sturdy bullocks are of the nature of Agni and Soma, and of Agni and Vishnu. The barren cow is of the nature of Mitra and Varuna, pranic energy. The rest anywhere are of friendly nature, wherever they are and wherever they The black-necked animals are fiery, the brown ones are cool and gentle as soma, the white ones are airy. The unknown are for the earth, those of like form for the Protector, the young calves for the wives of the divines and for the sun-rays to foster. 
1897 :The black ones, the farming animals, are for the earth. The brown ones are for the sky. The big, wonderful, whitish are live wires like electricity. The gentle ones are for the alleviation of suffering. 
1898 :For the spring season, you get the brown ones; for summer, whites; for the rains, black ones; for autumn, red ones; for freezing winter, thick ones; and for the cool season, you get yellow and orange. 
1899 :Animals of three six month periods of life are for the gayatri metre to sing; those of five periods are for trishtup; the burden bearing ones are for jagati; those with three calves are for anushtup; and those of the fourth stage of life are for the ushnih metre to sing. 
1900 :Those which bear the burdens on their back are for the virat metre to sing; the virile bulls are for brihati; the sturdy and most excellent bulls are for kakup; the cart-bullocks are for the pankti; and the cows are for the ati-chhanda metre to sing of. 
1901 :Black-necked animals are fiery. The brown and generous ones are gentle. The weak ones close at hand are of Savita, children of the sun. The cows with young calves are of Sarasvati. The dark ones are darlings of the cloud. The dappled cows are favourites of the Maruts. The multi-coloured ones are for Vishvedevas, the noblest people. And the brilliant domestic animals are gifts of earth and heaven. 
1902 :These animals described here and moving around are of Indra and Agni, airy and fiery. The black ones are of Varuna, most excellent lord of choice. The richly speckled ones are of the Maruts and for the stormy people. And the violent ones are for and of Prajapati. 
1903 :The man of wisdom and discrimination favours and selects first-born heroes for admirable Agni, fiery commander of the army, acclimatised animals for the disciplined heroes of the speed of the winds, well reared animals for the homely yajnic people, well-trained animals for the sportive fun-loving people, and domesticated animals for the quiet settled people. 
1904 :Described are these animals and the ways of raising and training them. Of divine care and purpose, they are of varied hue and beautiful horns, favourites of divinities and for divine purpose. Of Indra and Agni they are, of Mahendra and Vishvakarma. 
1905 :Smoky grey and dark brown animals are for kind and loving soma-natured parents and seniors. Brown and smoky dark are for the senior councillors. Black and brown are for those seniors who are experts of the science of fire. And black and spotted are for those who have three-fold responsibilities. (Honour the seniors with pet- gifts and protect the animals for them.) Described are these animals, white, beautiful, moving around, dedicated to the plough and the share, sustaining as the air, bright as the sunlight. They have the elements and virtues of the air and the sun. 
1906 :The bird specialist takes up the sparrow for the season of spring, the cuckoo for summer, the partridge for the rains, the quail for autumn, the kakara for freezing cold, and vikakara for the frosty season. 
1907 :The water-life specialist takes up the alligator in relation to the sea, frogs for the clouds, fish for the waters of lakes and rivers, kulipaya in relation to the sun and waters, and crocodile in relation to the oceans. 
1908 :The bird-expert takes up the hansa, geese, in relation to Soma, beauty and joy, the she-crane in relation to Vayu, breeze and pleasure, the krauncha in relation to Indragni, the warmth of fire and vibrations of energy, the madgu in relation to Mitra, sun and water, and the chakravaka in relation to Varuna, the love and vastness of space. 
1909 :The specialist in birds and bird behaviour takes up the cocks for Agni, the owls for the Vanaspati, trees, the blue jays for Agni and Soma, the peacocks for the Ashvinis, and the pigeons for Mitra and Varuna. 
1910 :He takes up the laba birds for Soma, kaulikas for Tvashta, goshadis which hurt the cows for the wives of the nobles, kulikas for the sisters of the nobles, and parushnas for Agni of the homestead. 
1911 :He takes up pigeons for the day, sichapus for the night, jatus for the morning and evening twilight, the crow for the months, and the big suparnas for the year. 
1912 :The expert studies the rodent holes for the earth, the rows of flying birds for the sky, the kasha birds for the light, the mungoose for the directions and the ichneumon for the interdirections. 
1913 :For the Vasu order of scholars, take up the study of the white footed rishya antelopes; for the Rudra scholars, take up the ruru antelopes; for the Aditya scholars, take up the nyanku antelopes; for the eminent and generous scholars, take up the prishata antelopes; and for the advanced researchers on yoga, the sadhyas, take up the kulunga antelopes. 
1914 :For the man of ruling power take up the parasvan antelopes of the forest, gauras for Mitra, the buffaloes for Varuna, wild cows for Brihaspati, and camels for Tvashta. 
1915 :Take up male elephants for Prajapati, flying white ants for speech, mosquitoes for the eye and moths for the ear. 
1916 :For Prajapati and Vayu, the wild cow; for Varuna, the wild ram; for Yama, black deer; for the ruler of people, the monkey; for the lion, red deer; for the bull, the wild cow; for the swift eagle, the partridge; for the blue-bodied, the insects; for the sea, crocodile; and for the snowy mountainous region, the elephant. 
1917 :The wild human (gorilla, yati, etc.) is the care of Prajapati; the little creatures, lion and wild cat for Dhata, master controller; the heron is for the directions; dhunksha bird is fiery; the sparrow, red snake and tank- creatures are for Tvashta; and the crane is for speech. 
1918 :The antelope is for Soma; the forest-goat, mungoose and the bee are for Pusha; the jackal is for the wild human; the white deer is for Indra; the pidva, nyanku and kakkata are for Anumati; and the chakravaka is for Echo. 
1919 :The female crane is for the sun; the sharga, the srijaya and the shayandaka, these birds are for Mitra; the human voiced parrot is for Sarasvati; the porcupine is for the earth; the lion, the wolf, and the snake, these are for Manyu (anger); and the human voiced male parrot is for the sea. 
1920 :The eagle is for the cloud; the aati (an aquatic bird), the serpent and the wood-pecker, these are for Vayu, the air; the paingaraja is for Vachasapati Brihaspati; alajais for the sky; the pelican, the cormorant and the fish, these are for the lord of streams; and the tortoise is for the earth and light. 
1921 :The buck belongs to the moon; the alligator, the kalaka, the wood pecker, these belong to the trees; the peacock belongs to Savita, the sun; the hansa is of the air; the iguana, crocodile, and the dolphin, they are of the sea, and the porcupine is for timidity. 
1922 :The doe is of the day; the frog, mouse and partridge, these are of the serpents; the lopasha is Ashvins’; black animal is for the night; the bear, the bat and the sushilika are for other people; and the hedgehog is for Vishnu. 
1923 :The cockoo belongs to the fortnights; the rishya deer, the peacock and the swan belong to the gandharvas (musicians); the crab belongs to the waters; the tortoise belongs to the months; the red deer, the house lizzard and the golattika belong to the water nymphs and the sunbeams; and the black deer is for death. 
1924 :The frog is for the seasons; the mouse, the rodents and the flying fox, these are of the pitaras; the serpent is for strength; the partridge is for the Vasus; the pigeon, the owl and the hare are for adversity; the wild ram is for Varuna. 
1925 :The white domestic animal is of the Adityas; the camel, the bright and tender animal and a big goat with streaks on nose are for intelligence; the wild cow is for the forest; the red deer is of Rudra; the kvayi, the cock and the crow, these are for the Vajins (speed); and the cuckoo is for love and desire. 
1926 :The rhino is for Vishvedevas; black dog, longeared ass, the tiger, these are for the demons; the boar is for the king; the lion is for the winds; the chameleon, pippaka and the vulture are for the marksman; the spotted deer is favourite of the noblest persons. 
1927 :By the teeth, test the efficiency of chewing and the texture of food, the strength of the teeth by the roots and gums, the protective enamel by the cavities, biting force by the fangs, the ease and elegance of speech by the fluent sweetness and suppleness of the tongue at the tip, the palate by the roll of the voice, the sweetness and energy by the action of the jaws, the deliciousness of drinks by the mouth, the maturity of manhood by the scrotum, the roll of years of maturity by the beard and moustache, the paths and manners of living by the eyebrows, the sense of heaven and earth by the orbits of movement, the inner light and energy by the pupils For the perfection of brahmacharya observe sexual and mental discipline. For the completion of the acquisition of knowledge observe the discipline of study. 
1928 :The actions for going across the river of life are indispensable like the lovely sugar-cane at hand this side of the river. And the actions this side of the river of life too must be like the lovely sugar-cane across the river. 
1929 :Receive the energy of the winds by the incoming breath of prana and the outgoing breath of apana by the nostrils. With the lower and upper lips observe the self- control of truth and the discipline of yama and niyama. With the light of higher knowledge illumine the inner personality. With cleanliness, purify the outer personality. Take in the light of divinity by the brahma- randhra, top aperture of the head. Hear the voice of thunder (of omnipotence) without interruption. Create the flash of lightning with the brain. Let the light shine by the pupils of the eyes. Develop hearing by the ears and the ears by hearing. Take in the food smoothly by the lower throat. Value the drinks by the parched throat. Develop the mind and memory by reflection and meditation. Realize the boundless in freedom with the imagination. Move on to the existential void with the head and speech unimpaired. 
1930 :Develop the pranas with invocations to universal energy, facing the storm with shouts of joy. 
1931 :Ward off mosquitoes and insects with hair. Achieve the power and greatness of Indra with hard work and great action. Reach Brihaspati, great lord of knowledge and wisdom, by the ordeal of fire and patience. Get to the tortoise and the earth with the speed of the eagle. Shoot to the target on the hoofs of a horse and power of arms. Get to the kapinjala birds by stout action and double speed. Get to speed and cover the road with strong legs. Get to the forest with the grape fruit. Get to Agni, fire, by will and desire, to Pusha, good health, by strong arms, to Ashvins, ruler and people, by strong shoulders, and to Rudra, power of justice, by listening and discussion. 
1932 :The body-politic of the nation of humanity has thirteen ribs on the right side of the chest. The first is Agni’s for light and fire. The second is Vayu’s for air energy. The third is Indra’s for sunlight and energy. The fourth is Soma’s for coolness and life of vegetation. The fifth is Aditi’s for the vastness and generosity of the sky. The sixth is Indrani’s for electric energy. The seventh is Marut’s for the winds. The eighth is Brihaspati’s for cosmic energy. The nineth is Aryaman’s for the working people. The tenth is Dhatri’s for the cosmic law. The eleventh is Indra’s for national honour, power and prosperity. The twenfth is Varuna’s for the enlightened citizens. The thirteenth is Yama’s for justice (The world system thus is organismic. Every part is a living member, and every man, woman and community should play their part in the life of the system.) The body-politic of the nation has thirteen ribs on the left side of the chest. The first belongs to Indragni for air and fire. The second belongs to Sarasvati for speech and education. The third belongs to Mitra for friendship. The fourth belongs to Aps, waters. The fifth belongs to Nir-riti, the earth. The sixth belongs to Agni-soma for fire and water. The seventh belongs to Sarpas, subterranean creatures. The eighth belongs to Vishnu, cosmic spirit. The nineth belongs to Pusha, health and nourishment. The tenth is Tvashta’s for brilliance and refinement. The eleventh belongs to Indra, the soul, for self-culture. The twelfth belongs to Varuna, enlightened people. The thirteenth belongs to Yami, nation’s women. The right side is for Dyava-prithivi, heaven and earth for light and life. The left side belongs to all the nobilities of nature and humanity for the joy of enlightenment. 
1933 :The shoulders of the nation belong to the Maruts, that is, the stormy troops of defence are the shoulders of the nation. The first and top part of the spine belongs to Vishvedevas, that is, the generous and enlightened people are the top of the nation’s spine. The second part of the spine belongs to the Rudras, men of law and justice. The third part belongs to the Adityas, brilliant people and children of the earth. The tail end belongs to Vayu, breath and fragrance of the nation. The hips of the nation belong to Agni and Soma, the heat of fire and coolness of water in the national mind. The poets and artists, two beautiful hansa birds, are comparable to the loins of the nation. Indra and Brihaspati, ruler and teachers, are comparable to the thighs. Mitra and Varuna, friendship and discrimination, are comparable to the groins. Develop force and advancement by the strength and suppleness of the thighs. Judge the strength and vitality of the nation by the slopes of the groin. 
1934 :(Note here that the rashtra/nation/Samraat purusha is compared to the individual purusha (Eka- raat purusha), and also to the universal purusha, i.e., the Viraat Purusha. Life thus is an organism at every stage from the individual to the universe.) Compare national health to food digestion and assimilation, blind serpents to large intestines, snakes to the bowels, crooked people to the intestines, water storages to the bladder and lower abdomen, vital rains and clouds to the scrotum, passion to the virile seed, food consumption to the bile, clearances to wind discharges, and judge the force of governance by the concentrations of power. 
1935 :You are in the bosom of Indra, father of light, let not the light sink into darkness. 
1936 :Stand firm, the food and fertility of the earth is where you stand. The meeting of the directions of space is in the joints of the ribs. The light within is the light of heaven. Know the shower of the clouds by the joy of the soul in the blood, the broadness of the skies by the coronary artery, the soothing liquidity of atmospheric water by the serum juices of the belly, the energy of life, like the love of chakravaka birds, by the pulmonary arteries, the purity of light by the cleansing action of the excretory organs, the hardness of mountains by digestion and assimilation, the cloud-generosity by the spleen, the paths of movement by the blood vessels, concentrations and enlargements by the veins, streams and rivers by the blood-streams, gulfs and bays by the womb and ovaries, the sea by the stomach, and universal fire by the heat of the body system. 
1937 :(Note the correspondence of the microcosm (eka- raat-purusha) and the macrocosm (Viraat-purusha) and the correspondence of the working of the two systems. The individual system works within the universal system as a unit. And this correspondence is worth knowing. The human individual is in the bosom of the universal Indra.) Know the centre-hold of the universe by the navel, liquid life of existence by the sap of nature, the waters of life by soup and decoctions, particles of light in rays by drops in a streams of oblations, the morning mist by vapours of steam, solid energy by frozen fat, precipitation of clouds by the tear glands, hail storms by shocks of disturbance, natural protections by immunity in the blood, wonders and mysteries by the limbs of the body, stars and planets by light and form, the crust of the earth by the skin of the body. 
1938 :Honour and homage to the Lord Supreme with surrender in truth of word and deed. 
1939 :The Great Golden Womb of the brilliant forms of existence, sole lord of the universe, existed by Himself long before the world was bom. He it is who holds this earth and Heaven. To Him we offer our homage and worship in libations of praise in words and deeds in truth. 
1940 :It is He who was and is the sole lord of the living, breathing and moving world of the eye (and ear). It is He who, by His own might, rules over the world of the humans and the animals. To that same lord of power and bliss we offer our homage and worship in libations of praise and fragrant havi in truth of word and deed. 
1941 :By whose might, they say, these snow-covered mountains have come into existence and the oceans roll with floods of water, and who by His arms of omnipotence wields these quarters of space, to Him we offer our homage and worship with oblations of praise and havi. 
1942 :The Lord who is the giver of birth to the soul with its power and potential, whose glory all the divinities of the world celebrate in song, whose shade of protection is immortality and falling off is death, to Him we offer our homage and worship in hymns with havi. 
1943 :May thoughts of wisdom and acts of yajna come to us from all directions—thoughts and actions noble and auspicious, pure and free from violence, irresistible and unobstructed, bursting forth and fruitful, so that young, energetic and brilliant people of divinity may arise in this assembly of ours and be the protectors and promoters of our advancement. 
1944 :May the auspicious wisdom of brilliant visionaries come to us. May the wealth and knowledge of simple, sincere and generous people come to us from all sides. May we enjoy the favour and friendship of noble and dedicated people of faith and excellence. And may all these nobilities thrive and promote our life for good and joyous living. 
1945 :Those we invoke and honour in yajna with the ancient, eternal and self-proclaimed voice of the Veda: Bhaga, giver of glory, Mitra, universal friend, Aditi, mother of indestructible wisdom, Daksha, lord versatile and inviolable, Aryama, sustainer of creation, Varuna, best and highest, Soma, giver of peace, prosperity, knowledge and happiness, Ashvinis, givers of health and well-being, and all the teachers and scholars of the world. 
1946 :May mother Sarasvati, benevolent and beatific, give us all the good and gracious gifts of life. 
1947 :May the joyous wind blow for us with the breath of life. May mother earth be green and fruitful for her children. May the fatherly sun bless us with light and brilliance. May the blissful clouds replete with the waters of life be generous with showers. And may you, Ashvinis, both sustaining powers of all round growth of body, mind and spirit, listen to our prayers and be kind and gracious. 
1948 :For our protection, we invoke and worship the lord and ruler of the moving and the unmoving world who inspires our intelligence, dedication and devotion, so that He, lord supreme inviolable, may be the protector, sustainer and promoter of all our wealth of life for the sake of advancement and well-being. 
1949 :May Indra, great is His glory, be kind and grant us honour and greatness. May Pusha, lord sustainer and wielder of universal wealth, be generous and bring us health and wealth. May the inviolable lord of speed and security be watchful and grant us progress and freedom. And may Brihaspati, lord of the great world of existence, be gracious and bless us with all the good and wellbeing in life. 
1950 :Great are the scholars, vibrant as the winds and brilliant as children of sunbeams. Riding on flying horses, they are ever on the move to goodness and glory in the battles of life. 
1951 :Fiery is their tongue and blazing are their eyes, and yet they are human, dedicated to thought and reflection. 
1952 :May all the scholars of the world come to bless us with protection and progress to our goal here in this life itself. 
1953 :Devas, men of knowledge and divinity, dedicated to yajna, may we hear only good with our ears, may we see only good with our eyes. Singing songs of praise with strong and stable limbs, may we live our full span of life, enjoying with strong and healthy bodies in the service of God and the divines. 
1954 :Scholars of knowledge and wisdom, while we are close to you, help us to live a full life of hundred years in good health of body wherein our children too may grow to be fathers of their children. Let not our life be hurt or injured. Let it not perish on the way in the middle of the course. 
1955 :In the essence: Light is indestructible; sky is indestructible; mother Prakriti (matter-energy-thought) is indestructible; Father, the Cosmic Spirit is indestructible; Son, the soul (jiva), is indestructible; all the divinities of nature and humanity are indestructible; five people, Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, others, are indestructible; whatever is born is indestructible; whatever will be born is indestructible. (All that was, is and shall be is indestructible in the essence.) May Mitra, friend, Varuna, great, Aryama, guide and leader, Indra, ruler, Ribhuksha, mighty, and Maruts, powers of the world, never overlook and ignore our life. And we shall praise and celebrate the warlike exploits of the divine-bom and tempestuous hero of the world of yajnic character. 
1956 :The persons who gratefully receive the gifts of the lord giver and with that pure and sacred wealth move the cycle of charity on ward; and also the self-developing man of immortal spirit with initiative and versatile potential in many fields; they all go forward on the favourite path of Indra and Pusha, blest with power and progress. 
1957 :When this aggressive leader, distinguished among equals of divine quality and loved of Pusha (the President), is advanced to the front by the dynamic nation, then Tvashta, maker of men and nations, receives him as a lovely gift of national yajna and, alongwith the nation, refines him with sanctification for honour and glory. 
1958 :When three orders of people take the man at the head of national yajna round the national vedi (the land) according to the seasons and circumstances of the country, then the man of immortal spirit, prime agent of the divinities of progress and development, Pushan, speaking in loud accents, takes the yajna forward for all the noble citizens. 
1959 :By the national yajna, cherished and well performed with dedication and grace, may all the functionaries, the hota with oblations, adhvaryu with meticulous organisation, agnimindha with lighting of the fire, gravagrabha with handling of soma stones, shansta with invocations, expert suvipra with vedic hymns, and all the other participants refresh, replenish and overfill all the streams of national life. 
1960 :(We thank) the cutters of wood for the yajna post, the carriers of the post, the shapers of the ring for the post and all those who collect the materials and complete the preparations for yajna, and, (we pray), may all their efforts be for our good and success. 
1961 :May the man of broad yajnic potential, the man able to realise the hopes of the learned, come to us spontneously and bear the wisdom of knowledge for us, so that the visionaries and intellectuals may rejoice with him and we may create a community of brotherhood among the brilliant scholars. 
1962 :Whatever the waistband or the leg fetter or the bridle, or the reins over the head or strings of control, and whatever kind of grass is held in the mouth of the fast and powerful horse (of national yajna), all these too should be under the control of the learned and the wise people, for you. 
1963 :Whatever fly stings and eats of the flesh of the fast running horse of the yajna of the nation, whatever smears the tempered steel, or whatever soils the hands and nails of the performers of ritual, all these too should be under the control of the learned and the wise for you. 
1964 :Whatever undigested waste is discharged from the stomach, and whatever are the gases of the half digested food, all that the expert yajamana (physicians) should relieve and rectify and they should also have delicious foods and fragrant materials prepared. 
1965 :If your person is on the stake being developed and matured by fire, and you feel strained, exhausted, almost dead, then whatever cry of pain escapes your lips, let it not fall into the dust, nor let it be lost in the straw, but let it be a valuable subject of study for the noble scholars who are keen to rectify it. 
1966 :Those who watch the nation’s food grow to ripeness, and those who say: It is fragrant, harvest it, and those who serve their share in the growth of the nation on the move, may all their effort be for the benefit of us all. 
1967 :Watchful stirring (replenishment) of the earth’s fertility for the growth of grain and fruit, whatever containers and reservoirs of water there be for growth and irrigation, the clouds for showers and alleviation of heat, and beauty spots from place to place: these beautify and add to the grace of a nation on the march. 
1968 :May the fire enveloped in smoke never extinguish or diminish your light. May the shining and fragrant dawn never disturb you into isolation. The noblest generous divinities accept and honour you as a hero, dear, brilliant, industrious, sanctified and marching forward. 
1969 :Nikramanam nisadanam vivarttanam yacca padvisamarvatah. Yacca papau yacca ghasim jaghasa sarva ta te ’api devesvastu. 
1970 :The start and gallop of your horse, the stop and sitting, turning round and rolling, halting and the fetters, what it drinks and the grass that it eats, may all these be good and graceful, and may they be appreciated by the noblest people. 
1971 :The cloth for the horse, the overcloth and the golden ornaments which adorn it, the head-band, and the fetters which control this fast-moving steed, may all these be beautiful, good and appreciable among the noblest people. 
1972 :Yatle sade mahasa sukrtasya parsnya vdi kasaya va tutoda. Sruceva ta haviso’adhvaresu sarva ta te brahmana sudayami. 
1973 :Swift and brilliant as you are with mighty strength and power, still if ever you feel weak and weary and someone hits you from the back with a whip (to hurt you or spur you on), then I replenish all your weaknesses and animate you to full form with the Vedic wealth just as we rekindle the fire in yajnas with ladlefuls of holy materials. 
1974 :Just as a man of innate expertise and intelligence controls the thirty-four movements of a tempestuous horse, which is a favourite friend of the nobles, so should the leader, a man of innate and rightful intelligence and power, a friend of the noble and brilliant people, control the dynamic governance of a vibrant nation and maintain all the parts of the national machine in a faultless order of efficiency, having examined the system step by step and declared, every part as perfect and approved. 
1975 :One is the marker of the sun’s horse/chariot of time, that is the year, the annual cycle of seasons. Two are the guiding controllers, the summer solstice and the winter solstice. I take the divisions of your course, O sun, O ruler, O nation, according to the seasons, and I dedicate them to the fire of national yajna according to the seasons and the circumstances of the nation. 
1976 :While you are on your way up in life, may your dear soul not forsake you, nor torment you. May no tempered steel fix itself in your person, nor your own power arrest you. Nor must the covetous pervert mutilate your limbs, nor tear your body asunder with the sword, for no cause or weakness whatsoever. 
1977 :This way, with this knowledge, you will not die, nor suffer wrong. Instead, you would rise to the state of the immortals by the straight paths of the divinities. Yoke your strong horses to the chariot, and let the fast horse be close to the bearer of the burden. 
1978 :development of cows, horses, men and women, children and all round health and wealth of the nation. 
1979 :May the freedom of the land and abundance of the earth lead us to a state of freedom from sin and crime. May the leader, high-priest of national yajna, ever ready and well-provided with holy materials, build a great social order for humanity. 
1980 :Ima nu kam bhuvana sisadhamendrasca visve ca devah. Adityairindrah sagano marudbhi- rasmabhyam bhesaja karat. Yajham ca nastanvam ca prajam cadityairindrah saha sisadhati. 
1981 :Just as the sun and all the divinities of nature hold, sustain and bless these worlds, so may the ruler and the noblest powers of humanity govern and sustain the regions of the world. May they and we all realise the joy of life. 
1982 :Just as the sun with its light and planets and the winds through the months and seasons of the year blesses us with herbs and juices for health and vitality, so may the physician with all his aids, light and air provide us with tonics and medication for health. 
1983 :Just as the sun and cosmic energy through the movement of the months and seasons carry on the creative and restorative yajna of nature for the earth and her children, so may the ruler with the brilliant leaders of the nation carry on and accomplish the social yajna for the health of the body-politic and the children of the nation. 
1984 :Agni, light of life, closest friend and saviour, be good to us, be the very spirit of our home. Pure and immaculate, warmth and vitality of life, rest and haven of all, universal creator and giver of wealth, come and bless us with the most brilliant knowledge and wealth of life. 
1985 :Tam tv a socistha cbdivah sumnaya nunamimahe sakhibhyah. Sa no bodhi srudhi havam urusya no ’ aghayatah samasmdt. 
1986 :Lord of the universe, most briliant power, blazing with the light of knowledge and Dharma, we pray to you for the good and well-being of life sincerely for our friends and for ourselves. Such as you are, enlighten us, listen to our prayers, save and protect us from all sin and crime against Dharma and Society. 
1987 :Agnisca prthivi ca sannate te me sam namata- mado vayuscantariksam ca sannate te me sam namatamada ’ddityasca dyausca sannate te me sam namatamada ’apasca varunasca sannate te me sam namatamadah. Sapta samsado astami bhutasadhanl. Sakamah ’adhvanaskuru samjha- namastu me ’muna. 
1988 :Agni, vital heat, and Prithivi, earth, go together in harmony (for this side of life, for Dharma, righteous living, Artha, earthly prosperity, Kama, worldly fulfilment). May they be harmonious and favourable for me for the other side too (Moksha, ultimate freedom). 
1989 :Vayu, the air, and Antariksha, the sky, go together in harmony for this side of life. May they be favourable for me for the other side too. 
1990 :Aditya, the sun, and Dyau, heaven, go together in harmony for this side. May they be favourable for me for the other side too. 
1991 :Apah, spatial waters, and Varuna, the oceans, go together in harmony for me this side of life, may they be favourable for the other side too. 
1992 :Seven are the conjunctions between oceans, waters, sun, heaven, air, sky, heat and earth, which hold the world. The eighth, mother earth, sustains the forms of life. May all the conjunctions and the sustaining mother’s lap help us realise our aims of life. 
1993 :O mler, act well so that our aims of life be fulfilled and the paths of life be straight and clear. 
1994 :By dedication to the other side, may I have full knowledge of existence and beyond. 
1995 :Just as this blessed Word of the Veda I speak for the people, all without exception, Brahmana, Kshatriya, Shudra, Vaishya, master and servant, one’s own and others, so do you too. 
1996 :May I be dear and favourite with the noble divinities and the generous people for the gift of the sacred speech. 
1997 :May this noble aim of mine be fulfilled here in this life. May the others too follow and come my way beyond this life. 
1998 :Brihaspati, lord of the great universe, master of universal wealth, lord of light and yajnic actions among humanity, you shine by virtue of your own glory. Manifest in the law and order of existence and in the Veda, you blaze with your own omnipotence. Such as you are, Lord, bless us with the wonderful knowledge and wealth of the world. 
1999 :Man of knowledge, consecrated you are in the yajna of knowledge as if you are an oblation in the sacrificial ladle, upayama. I accept you in the service of Brihaspati, lord of the world and its knowledge, for the sake of Brihaspati, enlightenment of the scholars with divine knowledge. This now is your haven and home, your end and aim of life. 
2000 :Indra, lord of the earth and the divine Word, highpriest of a hundred yajnas of life, come here and drink of the soma extracted by the existent scholars with the sacred stones and distilled by the clouds. 
2001 :Man of divine knowledge, master of your mind and senses, consecrated you are to Indra, lord of earth and Veda. I accept you for the service of Indra and education of the people. This service and dedication is now your haven and home, the end and aim of your life. 
2002 :Indra, lord of sunbeams, breaker of the clouds and high-priest of a hundred yajnas of creation, come and drink of the soma extracted by brilliant men of knowledge and wealth of self-control with the voice of thunder and showers of clouds. 
2003 :Man of brilliance and knowledge, accepted and consecrated you are like an oblation held in the sacrificial ladle for the service of Indra, lord of the sun and clouds. This service and dedication now is your haven and home, the very reason and justification of your existence. I accept you for Indra and the man of wealth and self-control. 
2004 :We love Vaishvanara, eternal fire, lord of the laws of truth and light of the world, and we pray for the vital fire of life acting on waters within the laws of nature. 
2005 :Man of knowledge and science, you are consecrated like an oblation held in the sacrificial ladle for service to Vaishvanara, fiery vitalizer of life. I accept you for service to the fire and waters of nature. This service and dedication now is your very haven and home, the very meaning of your life. 
2006 :Vaisvdnarasya sumatau syama raja hi karii bhuvananamabhisrlh. Ito jato visvamidam vi caste vaisvanaro yatate suryena. Upayamagrhlto’si vaisvanaraya tvaisa te yonirvaisvanaraya tva. 
2007 :Let us abide by the laws and wisdom of Vaishvanara, leader of the universe. Glorious light of the world, He creates the joy, beauty and glory of the worlds in existence. Manifesting from the world itself, He watches and energises this whole universe and, as the vital heat energy of life, works with the sun for the sustenance of life and growth. 
2008 :Man of science and knowledge, accepted and consecrated you are by the laws of life and nature for the service of Vaishvanara. This service now is your haven and home. I accept you for the sake of Vaishvanara, science of heat and energy. 
2009 :Vaishvanara Agni, brilliant power of light and knowledge, come from afar for our protection and advancement, with the Uktha Vedic verses, by a beautiful chariot. 
2010 :Brilliant man of knowledge and science, consecrated and dedicated you are like an oblation in the ladle for Vaishvanara, the fire of social yajna. This dedication is now your life and aim. I accept you for the sake of advancement in the field of science and technology. 
2011 :We worship Agni that is the light and vision of the world and knowledge, purifier of life, friend and protector of universal humanity, front leader of the yajnas of existence, and lord of wealth and home of all. 
2012 :Man of knowledge, vision and leadership, consecrated and dedicated you are to Agni, lord of light and life and advancement. This dedication is your haven and home. I accept you for the sake of enlightenment and progress of knowledge, purity and prosperity of life and all sections of society. 
2013 :Indra, great and glorious mler of the world, perfect with full sixteen virtues of nature and spirit, may, we pray, grant us peace and joy. Thunderbolt in hand, may He strike off and remove him who commits the sin of hate and hostility against us. 
2014 :Leader of power and perfection, consecrated and dedicated you are to Indra, Supreme ruler, like an oblation for the yajna of peace and friendship. This dedication now is your end and aim of life. I accept and honour you for the sake of the unity of humanity and conquest of hate and fear. 
2015 :Just as cows in their stalls every day call forth the calf for the feed and rejoice, so do we, for you all, in songs of love and joy, invoke and celebrate Indra, the ruler, dynamic lord of wondrous deeds and felicity who takes delight in the food and nourishment of his people and loves to see them settled in good homes in a state of comfort and prosperity. 
2016 :Vibhavasu, lord of brilliance and power, ruler of the world, honour and celebrate him who carries the highest and heaviest burdens of the state in the service of Agni, self-refulgent glory of the human nation. Like the queen of magnificence, all the wealth of food, power and prosperity of the nation issues forth from your palace and personality. Honour Him (Agni), let us honour Him. 
2017 :Agni, seeker of light, come gently without reservation. I would speak to you other words (than I have yet spoken) and you would then advance with these sparks of light and drops of soma (in health and wisdom). 
2018 :Rtavaste yajham vi tanvantu masa raksantu te havih. Sa/nvatsaraste yajnam dadhatu nah prajam ca pari patu nah. 
2019 :Man of knowledge, seeker of light, may the seasons expand your yajna. May the months protect and increase your holy materials of yajna. And may the year uphold your yajna, and may it sustain and advance our people in all directions. 
2020 :In the lap of mountains where flow the streams to meet and join, there with the dawn of holy intelligence the man of light is born. 
2021 :Man of knowledge, up on high is your home in the light of heaven risen from holy food and soma juice, blazing, great and admirable. I watch it with reverence and pray it be as firm with the earth as it is in the light of heaven. 
2022 :Man of knowledge, light and power, knowing what is good and disposed to oblige, come overflowing like soma for elevating company for the sake of Indra, man of power and dominion, Varuna, man of excellence, and the Maruts, men of tempestuous speed. 
2023 :The lord and master of the world rules and watches all these powers, wealths and honours of men and women. Wishing to serve the master and humanity, May the powers of divinity and the noblest people guide and conduct our yajna according to the seasons so that we may grow strong and powerful with healthy children and brave heroes, with fertile cows, with strong horses, with all other things, with all men and animals as our own. 
2024 :Agni, master of knowledge and power, bring up the nobles’ wives, women of love and desire, bring Tvashta, lord maker of human forms, here to the yajna for a life-giving drink of soma. 
2025 :Man of holy speech, leader and high-priest of yajna, drink the soma and praise and celebrate our yajna alongwith the season. You alone are the creator and giver of the wealth of the world. 
2026 :The generous man of wealth and honour wants to drink the soma of health from the flask with humility according to the seasons. Feel the desire, you too search and you shall find the juice. Perform the homa, abide and win honour and settlement. 
2027 :Indra, man of knowledge in search of honour and power, this soma is yours. Come straight on here and, happy at heart, protect, preserve and advance this eternal Dharma of joy in action. 
2028 :In this yajna, sit on the holy seats of blessed grass, take this nectar of life and light and hold it in your vital being. 
2029 :Tvashta, man of knowledge, maker and shaper of men, centre of a happy company of scholars, loved, honoured and cordially invited, accept our hospitality and enjoy with the generous and brilliant people of divine birth. 
2030 :Come ye all, feel at home, sit on the holy seats of grass in our yajna and rejoice. Rejoice and enlighten us with knowledge and wisdom. 
2031 :Soma, come, spirit of life, distilled for the drink as well as the protection of Indra, leading powers of knowledge, honour, peace and prosperity, flow in in the most delicious and inspiring streams of nectar. Flow on and on freely. 
2032 :Agni, man of fire and yajna, destroyer of evil and watchful saviour of the world with light, finds his haven and home safe and secure with others on the golden altar of yajna consecrated by the showers of soma from the clouds. 
2033 :Agni, man of knowledge and light of the world, may the years, seasons, year cycles, visionaries of truth and acts of absolute truth whatever and wherever they be: may all these take you forward in life. Shine with celestial light and illuminate all the directions and interdirections of the world with your knowledge and brilliance. 
2034 :Sam cedhyasvagne pra ca bodhayainamucca tistha mahate saubhagaya. Ma ca risadupasatta te ’ague brahmanaste yasasah santu ma ’nye. 
2035 :Agni, brilliant power of knowledge, light up and rise and enlighten this yajamana, seeker of light and knowledge, and rise and stay up high for honour and glory. 
2036 :while scholars of the Veda and your admirers, not others, shall win honour and brilliance. 
2037 :Agni, brilliant lord of light and knowledge, these Brahmanas, dedicated scholars of divinity, choose and elect you as guide and leader. 
2038 :Agni, in this position of eminence, be good to us. Destroyer of negativities, subduer of the proud and insidious, you are watchful, awake and alert in your own home. Keep us too awake, alert and ever watchful. 
2039 :Agni, brilliant lord of light and power, here itself hold and rule over the power and prosperity you have. Let not the veterans, experienced, alert and watchful of yajna, either ignore or denigrate you. May the social order be well-governed for your sake so that you and your devotees, supreme and unviolated, may move Agni, bright and blazing like light and fire, youthful and golden is your age. Take over and start well here with this world-order of humanity. 
2040 :Agni, mighty intelligent ruler, rule and work with the spirit of friendship in the world state which is a covenant of friends. Go forward, seated in the centre of an assembly of equals who are like brothers and sisters. 
2041 :Agni, elected, invited and installed in office by the sovereign nations of the world, rule, shine and illuminate the world here. 
2042 :Agni, lord of light and wealth, repelling the false, eliminating the wicked, dispelling darkness and ignorance and fighting out all the evils of the world, give us a republic of brave good heroes overflowing with plenty, prosperity and generosity. 
2043 :Agni, lord and ruler of the world, undaunted, omniscient, inviolable, self-refulgent, holder and sustainer of the world-order, remove all human fear, hate, disease etc., shine and illuminate all the regions of the world, and now protect us for advancement with peace and benevolence. 
2044 :Brihaspati, guardian of all, Savita, giver of light and knowledge, educate and enlighten this intelligent and honourable ruler as well as the people in every way. Let him grow and advance for the greatness and prosperity of the nation. Let all the noble powers of divinity and humanity rejoice with him. 
2045 :Brihaspati, lord and saviour of all, guard the ruler against any curse or calumny or evil that may tarnish him in the life to come, and save him from any accusation or damnation of the law or constitution or Yama, the supreme and universal judge of human performance. 
2046 :Agni, lord of life and light, may the Ashvinis, nature’s powers of health, teachers, preachers and physicians, with their best actions and research, keep off the onslaughts of ill-health and fatality from him. 
2047 :Let us rise beyond the dark, watching the heavenly light above, high and higher, and reach to the sun, highest light and most generous divinity of the saviour divinities of the world. 
2048 :May the holy fuels of fire be great and best, may the flames of fire be blazing high and pure—fire, most brilliant in splendour, most beautiful of form, dynamic impeller of life and life’s growth. 
2049 :Vayu/Agni, which allows not the body to fall, which is breath of life, replete with universal vitalities, divine among divinities, and most generous, may that Vayu/Agni sprikle our path of life with the sweetest nectar of ghrta. 
2050 :Agni, with honey sweets you come to yajna, Agni, loved and inspiring, celebrated by yajniks, benevolent, brilliant, creator and sustainer, and universal treasure of life’s wealth. 
2051 :and non-violence, the high-priest comes gracefully to the fire holding the ladle, celebrating Agni, the deity, with brilliant power of knowledge, water and ghee, and food for the fire. 
2052 :Let the high-priest, seated and seating others in yajna, conscientious and richest in yajna materials, worship the grandeur of generous Agni and offer fragrant exhilarating oblations into the fire. And he would know and feel and enjoy the gift of bliss. 
2053 :By the light and splendour of this expansive fire emanating from its abode (vedi), the scholars of yajna, dedicated to the protection and promotion of life and nature, open the celestial doors, and reveal the laws and functions of this universal power. 
2054 :May the two divine mothers, the morning and the evening (the twilight, and the dawn), guard and expand this holy non-violent yajna of ours in the home of this fire in the vedi. 
2055 :May the two divine priests (seeker and teacher, fire and air) expand our holy non-violent yajna to the heights, raise and praise the flames of fire and propitiously do us the desired good. 
2056 :Three divine excellencies, Ida, potential speech of omniscience in the eternal mind in heaven, Sarasvati, speech of eternal knowledge of the Veda flowing across the space, and Bharati, actualized speech of knowledge articulated in the shastras, may these, great and holy, adoring the Supreme Lord and highly adored by us, consecrate our seats of yajna and the home. 
2057 :May Tvashta, divine artist of the world, generous to all, gain for us fast-maturing, wonderful and virile health, wealth and noursihment, place it at the hub of the nation’s movement and relieve us of want and suffering. 
2058 :Vanaspati, scholar and researcher of the science of yajna, just as the holy fire of peaceful yajna refines and universalizes the holy materials, so you, rejoicing at heart among noble and generous scholars, create refined and powerful holy materials for the fire of natioinal yajnas of production and purification. 
2059 :Agni, lord of world knowledge, take this holy offering and, in truth of word and deed, refine and raise it to the grace and glory of Indra, spirit of power and prosperity of the world. And may all the noble people of the world and divinities of nature share this holy gift and rejoice. 
2060 :All the leading scholars of the world, well-provided for living, of equal mind and noble intelligence, concentrating on the knowledge of Vayu, wind and energy, promote the wealth of the world and produce a new generation of noble descendants. And Vayu, pure and immaculate spirit and essence of life, blesses these dynamic enterprising people with grace and dignity. 
2061 :The Heavan and the earth generate Vayu for the wealth of energy. The divine intelligence activates Vayu to reveal the wealth of the divine Word. And then, that same Vayu, pure treasure of energy, all the living beings in existence together seek, enjoy and pursue (for the When the cosmic waters of existence (that is, tanmatras, subtle elements of Prakriti, material cause of the universe, or, we can say, Mahan, the existential form of Prakriti) appear on the cosmic scene, holding the vishva-garbha, seed form of the universe in their womb, and give birth to Agni (vital heat of nature and mother of stars such as the sun), then arises Vayu, the one life-breath of the divine forms of existence. To that divine breath of life, let us pay homage with love and action in faith. 
2062 :The One Supreme Lord over all the divine forms of Prakriti, who overwatches the cosmic waters with His own might of immanence and omniscience — waters (tanmatras) conducting the great yajna of evolution and producing various forms of life, to that One Lord of Bliss let us pay homage and offer worship with acts of love and faith in yajna. 
2063 :Vayu, by the waves of your own energy you fly so gracefully to the house of the generous yajamana for the desired objects. Bless us with enjoyable gifts of wealth and food. Bless us with brave heroes, wealth of cows and horses, and the power and dignity of life. 
2064 :Vayu, tempestuous power of divine nature, by a hundred modes of action and a thousand currents of energy in this mighty yajna of creative evolution, you come to our holy yajna of love and action in the world. Come, rejoice in this yajna and bless us too with joy. 
2065 :Sages of knowledge and yajna, you too protect us with your knowledge and your blessings for peace, Divine Vayu, One universal inmanent life-breath of the universe, primary leading light of nature and humanity, just as this wind, pure and immaculate, moves and blesses the house of a devotee of soma and yajna, so you, pure and immaculate, come in response to my invocation. Here I come to you. 
2066 :Vayu, brilliant power divine, honey-sweet and pure, worthy of emulation and admiration, I come, invoke and invite you, leading light of holy gatherings of yajna. Come at the speed of the wind, and join here for a drink of soma. 
2067 :activities of life, lover of yajna, come with your heart and soul to the yajna. Blissful you are, come with all your sagely acts and blessed powers. 
2068 :Vayu, leader and scholar of the speed of the winds, thousands are the paths and modes of your movement forward. Take them all and come for a wonder-work of joy with a holy drink of soma. 
2069 :Ekaya ca dasabhisca svabhute dvabhyamistaye vimsatl ca. Tisrbhisca v abase trims at a ca niyudbhirvayaviha ta vi munca. 
2070 :Vayu, master of your own innate powers and knowledge, you conduct the yajna of life by one and ten, two and twenty, three and thirty paths and modes and speeds for the desired end and aim of life. Come here and conduct the yajna, and then release everything and be free. 
2071 :Vayu, sustainer of truth and the laws of nature, wonderful power, maker of new forms and shaper of the new generations for Tvashta, lord creator, we pray for your gifts of protection, sustenance and advancement. 
2072 :Indra, fearless and brave, lord and ruler of the moving and the unmoving world, it is bliss to see you! Like unmilked cows yearning for their calves, we invoke you to pay homage to you. 
2073 :Na tvavah’anyo divyo na parthivo na jato na janisyate. Asvayanto maghavannindra vajino gavyantastva havamahe. 
2074 :Indra, supreme lord of power and glory, destroyer of pain and suffering, there is none other like you on earth or in heaven ever born or yet to be born in future. Blest with horse and speed, food and power, cows and wealth of holy Word, still yearning to move faster and higher, we come and offer homage and worship to you. 
2075 :Indra, lord of power and commander of the forces, sun among the clouds and defender of truth, we, leaders of men and achievers of success, invoke you in the battles of science and knowledge and do homage to you advancing into all directions like a horse on the wing. 
2076 :Indra, wonderful lord of the thunderbolt in hand, lord of the clouds and strong as adamant, highly praised and celebrated by virtue of your own glory, give us abundant wealth of cows, horses, chariot bullocks as well as true knowledge of science for the sake of victory. 
2077 :Lord of light and knowledge, wonderful and aweinspiring, be a friend of the progressive, bless us with protection and help us join with blissful and powerful mode of action and advancement. 
2078 :Indra, the real soothing, genuine and most powerful essence of efficacious soma and herbal food which relieves and exhilarates you, that surely is the valuable and unfailing panacea for the cure of ill-health. 
2079 :Indra, lord of power and knowledge, you are the over-all saviour and protector of our friends and admirers. Be gracious to us in a hundred ways for our protection and well-being. 
2080 :In every yajna, by every word, for the sake of Agni, power of light, energy, intelligence and expertise, we invite, honour and celebrate you. Let us all together celebrate and sing in praise of Agni, immortal and omniscient lord, as a darling friend of ours. 
2081 :Agni, lord of knowledge, action, love and freedom, master of life, energy and food, home and shelter of all forms of existence, protect and promote us by one voice, voice of the Riks, for knowledge. Protect and promote us by the second voice, voice of the Yajus, for action. Protect and promote us by the three voices of Riks, Yajus and Samans for knowledge, action and worship. Protect and promote us by the four voices of Riks, Yajus, Samans and Atharvans, for Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. 
2082 :Scholar, sage, teacher, learner, promote the child of life and energy, vayu, agni and knowledge, which allow not the grandeur of life to diminish, so that nature and knowledge may be our friends, protect us in the battles of life and continue to be the saviours of our persons and people. Friends as they are, we invoke them for the oblations of holy offerings in yajna. 45. (Agni Devata, Shamyu Rshi) Agni, brilliant scholar, teacher, learner, you move by the law of nature like the current year, give up the weaknesses like the year gone by. You are wide-awake and comprehensive like the universally present year, and definite like the year cycle. May the dawns flourish and be favourable to you. May the day-night cycle be flourishing and favourable to you. May the fortnights flourish and be favourable to you. May the months flourish, may the seasons flourish, may the years flourish and be favourable to you. 
2083 :For coming and going, advancement and return, collect, expand, control and contain. 
2084 :You are the winner of life’s golden beauties. Move forward in unison with that divinity of Time like the breath of life and stay fast and firm with Dharma like the fixed stars. 
2085 :Let the hota, man of yajna, offer faithful libations of holy materials, research and study in honour of Indra (agni, i.e., energy, heat and light) enshrined in the divine Word, latent at the centre of the earth, blazing on top of heaven and thundering in the clouds. 
2086 :And such a yajna, shining with lustre and most brilliant among men of might and valour, would enjoy the most delicious gifts of life. 
2087 :to Indra, ruling power of the world, preserver and protector of the forms of life, victorious, unviolated, brilliant and generous, and heavenly, with oblations of defensive actions along the sweetest paths of virtue ; and with his own lustre and valour, celebrated in songs of praise in society, and he would attain the best gifts of life. 
2088 :Let the man of yajna, with the holiest words and oblations offer yajna and service to Indra, immortal ruler of the world, honoured and worshipped by the noblest powers. And he, brilliant and generous, mighty of strength, wielder of the thunderbolt in hand, destroyer of the enemy forts, would lead you to the best and sweetest gifts of a prosperous society. 
2089 :Let the devotee of national yajna offer service with yajna to Indra, virile hero of manly deeds and chief of the council, sitting on the vedi along-with his colleagues of the Vasu, Rudra and Aditya order of education and national discipline. And Indra would grace the yajna of the people and lead them to the highest state of power and prosperity. 
2090 :Man of yajna, perform the yajna in honour of Indra, powerful and glorious personality of the nation. Just as wide open gates augment the flood of waters so may the doors of yajna augment the vigour, valour and brilliance of the nation. And in this national yajna, may the saints and sages going by the paths of rectitude and extending the bounds of truth open wide the gates of glory and advancement for the bountiful Indra. 
2091 :Let the hota, man of yajna, perform yajna in honour and service of the morning dawn and the evening twilight, which, like two great generous mother cows in the open air of universal energy, nourish Indra, the sun, like a calf and feed it with light and augment its glory. 
2092 :Hota, do the yajna, increase and extend the beauty and glory of the world and enjoy. Never relent. 
2093 :Let the hota offer the oblations in honour and service for the Ashvinis, two high-priests of nature in the fields of health and well-being. They are the physicians, friends, who carry on the yajna for the health of Indra, the soul in body. Both of them, wise visionaries, brilliant and generous, masters of divine science, work for and extend the health and well-being of Indra. 
2094 :Hota, carry on the yajna, augment and extend the health and well-being of humanity and enjoy yourself too. 
2095 :Let the hota, man of yajna, offer yajna for the sake of the health and happiness of the soul to the three great divinities, Ida, potential speech of divine omniscience, Saraswati, divine Word of knowledge, and Bharati, language of the world-knowledge of science. 
2096 :Let the three, teacher, preacher and physician (agents of great actions and creators of three supreme humors of body-health), as three servants of the regions of earth, sky and heaven, serve with yajna the three divinities of Ida, Saraswati and Bharati. 
2097 :And the three, teacher, preacher and the physician, and the three mother-sustainers of the soul, generous with the wealth of life, would bless the soul and the world with plenty of health and well-being. 
2098 :Let the hota, yajaka, offer yajna to Tvashta, maker of refined forms beyond weaknes. He blesses, Indra, valorous, glorious and generous, physician, honourable in yajna, abundant and graceful, versatile in various fields and nobly virile, lord of power and grandeur. And Tvashta would bless you with the excellence of mind and sense and create all the knowledge of sense and mind and culture for you. 
2099 :Let the man of yajna offer homage and honour to Vanaspati, lover of nature and brilliant as the lord of sunbeams, dedicated to peace, man of a hundred noble acts and admirer of intelligence and culture, and he would, thereby, moving ahead by the simple paths of honesty and virtue, adding sweetness and grace to the beauty and glory of life, he would taste the rapturous honey himself. 
2100 :Let the man of yajna extend and expand the yajna of life with honey and sacred water and ghee and add to the prosperity of society for all and for himself too. 
2101 :Let the noble man of yajna offer libations of richest materials of truth of word and deed for the sake of Indra, universal power and honour of the world, libations of oils and fats with the best of words and actions, of the truthful actions of the children, of the young generations, of the truth of social conduct and behaviour, with the sacred words of yajna according to the Vedas and Shastras. 
2102 :And the noblest people, Indra and divinities enjoying the offerings in truth of word and deed with love and admiration would extend and expand the glories of life and humanity. 
2103 :Let the fire and splendour of yajna blazing in the vedi, invoked in the morning and preserved at night, advance Indra, power of world knowledge, divine among divines, surrounded by the noblest presences like a hero. Let the fire rise to the heavens across the air and waters in the sky and advance Indra with wealth and prosperity. 
2104 :Hota, man of yajna, carry on the yajna, advance the wealth and knowledge of the world for the world of humanity and enjoy yourself too. 
2105 :Let the strong and celestial doors of the nation’s march open wide and advance Indra onward in the social dynamics of progress, removing the whirlwinds of the dust of time and urging him on like a horse spurred on by a darling youthful prince brilliant as the rising sun. 
2106 :Man of yajna, carry on the yajna, let the wealth and honour of the nation rise for all, and enjoy. 
2107 :May the brilliant dawn and the starry night inspire and call forth the youthful yajamana, Indra, to the yajnic endeavour of the world, and may the two, loving and beneficent, bless the noble people and help them create and expand the wealth of the earth for all the people. 
2108 :Hota, man of yajna, carry on the creative endeavour. Never relent. 
2109 :Two divine powers of nature, the dawn and the day, and the evening and the night augment the light and beauty of the sun. One, the evening, wards off the hate and sins of the mind and the other, the morning, proclaims and points to the choicest wealths of the world. May both create, promote, and bring down the wealth of heaven for the world and the yajamana. 
2110 :Two sacred divinities of nature, day and night, holding strength and energy, both generous and abundant in joy and fulfilment, nourish and advance Indra, spirit of humanity and prosperity of the world. One of them, the night, begets food and replenishment of energy and the other, the day, begets a common meal and common drink for us. Full of peace and joy, they hold and join the old with the new, and the new with the old. 
2111 :Replete with the spirit and wisdom of divinity, blest with wealth of energy, blessing all with energy, they hold the choicest gifts of life in store for the yajamana, the human soul, and bring us showers of peace and grace of God upon the earth. 
2112 :Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with the night and day. 
2113 :fire, generous and brilliant, full of divine properties, feed the sun-beams with the fragrance of yajna and the smell of earth and add to the prosperity of the world. They eliminate the agents of sin and crime (by the elimination of poverty) and burn out the causes of disease. Full of the spirit of nature’s wisdom, they beget choice gifts of wealth and water and promote the blessings of God upon the earth for the yajamana. 
2114 :Man of yajna, carry on with the yajna in unison with nature, never relent. 
2115 :Three divine powers serve, strengthen and elevate Indra, the human soul, their master and servant both, with three sacred processes of action: Bharati, the speech and light of sattva, with the energy of the Rudra pranas, reaches the light of heaven. Sarasvati, the speech and currents of nature’s dynamics, with sacred chants through fire and wind, expands the yajna and refines the business of living. And Ida, the earth and holy libations, bear worldly wealth and bless the homes with prosperity. Thus the three divinities bring down the riches of the Divine Giver into the life of humanity, the receiver, on earth through yajna. 
2116 :The divine human soul, Indra, in pursuit of greatness, in love and admiration of humanity, in control of three councils, bound by three disciplines of knowledge, action and worship through Riks, Yajus and Samans, should dedicate himself in yajna to Indra, lord, life and energy of the universe. Such a person, favoured by a hundred forms of refined energy, moves forward in a hundred ways. His fastest food is the energy of prana and udana. Brihaspati, universal voice of sustenance is his song of divine praise. The Ashvinis, sun and moon, are the divine priests of his yajna. And these divine powers bring into the life of this devotee in search of wealth the blessings of the lord of the worlds. 
2117 :The lord of sun-beams, the Tree of life, brilliant with its lustrous virtues, of golden leaves, honeyed branches and delicious fruit strengthens and elevates the divine Indra, power of generosity and eliminater of poverty. With its top it reaches the light of heaven, energises and expands the skies, and strengthens and enriches the earth. And thus it brings for the dedicated world of humanity the riches as blessings of the lord of the treasures of the universe. 
2118 :Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with the sun and the Tree, never relent. 
2119 :The divine ether worthiest among the choicest aspects of nature sustains and elevates Indra, brilliant human soul, as well as natural energy, well-nestled and happily placed with Indra, the Divine Presence. It holds, sustains and pervades the other parts of space and brings the wealth of the universe for the yearning human soul on earth. 
2120 :Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in tune with space and nature and enjoy. Never relent. 
2121 :Blessed Agni, brilliant and generous divine fire energy, which purifies and sanctifies everything, may bless and elevate Indra, the human soul, turning everything to good and auspicious for us today. Power of good and blessedness, may it bestow the wealth of the world on the dedicated man of yajna yearning for wealth. 
2122 :delicacies, collecting the herbs and goat’s milk, cleansing and strengthening, invokes the fire and selects the priest to-day. 
2123 :The lord of sun-beams and herbs, the sun, joins in presence with the herbs and the goat milk for the honour of Indra (through the fire). 
2124 :The fire receives the holy delicacies in response to the yajamana and advances his wealth and honour. 
2125 :O Rshi, man of vision and knowledge, may Agni advance your wealth and honour too. 
2126 :Let the man of piety offer yajna in dedication to Agni, lighted, blazing, great and glorious, worthy of choice, and to Indra, lord of power and grandeur, giver of good health and long life. Let him chant the Gayatri, treasure of joy and giver of the freedom of thought, and he would be blest with wealth of mind and senses, riches of the thrice protective earth mother, good health and long age. 
2127 :Man of yajna, extend and expand the yajna and enjoy the best of knowledge and honour in the world. 
2128 :Let the devotee of yajna, seeker of knowledge, perform yajna for Indra, light of the rising sun, bright and pure, life-giving, self-preserving and self-risen as if through the folds of the earth, whom Aditi, mother nature, had borne in the womb of the Night. Offer libations to Indra like the first feed of an innocent newborn baby and you would create, promote and enjoy wealth of knowledge, wisdom of the ushnik verses of the Veda, strength and joy, brilliance of mind and sense, self-regeneration, sweetness and power of speech, health and long age, and the very nectar of life. 
2129 :Great Soul, worthy of love and praise, celebrated in sacred hymns, admirable breaker of the clouds of darkness, lord of courage and endurance, peace and bliss and the beauty and grace of life. And holding on to freedom and joy of the Anushtubh verses of the Veda, sensitivity of mind and senses, five streams of pranic energy and the beauty and poetry of life, the yajaka would create, promote and enjoy the wealth and prosperity of the world. 
2130 :Let the devotee of yajna offer yajna to Indra, the Great Soul, lord of vast spaces, everflowing with nourishments, indestructible, graceful on the seat of cosmic yajna, dear, immortal and ever young. And holding on to the grand Brihati verses of the Veda, joy of freedom, sensitivity of sense and intelligence, devotion to knowledge, action and worship of the divine, nobility of speech and awareness and the beauty of life, he would create, promote and enjoy the wealth and prosperity of life. 
2131 :Let the man of yajna consecrate the wide, open and spacious golden gates of heavenly truth for the expansion of divine virtue, offer reverence to the scholar of the Vedas and do yajna in honour of Indra, lord of grandeur and knowledge. And, holding on to the scientific truth of Pankti verses of the Veda, freedom, worldly wealth, and strong fourfold burden bearing bulls for transport, create, promote and enjoy the beauty and graces of life in this world. 
2132 :Let the hota, devotee of yajna, join and consecrate the night and day, both well shaped, beautiful, great and pleasing to the eye and, like them, offer yajna to Indra, lord of the world’s life and age, and holding on to the wisdom of the Trishtubh verses, strength, speed of progress, wealth and sensitivity, and strong burdenbearing bulls in this world, create, promote and enjoy the beauty and grace of life as do the night and day. 
2133 :Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with the night and day. 
2134 :Let the hota join Prachetas, two wise and brilliant high-priests (such as the fire and the sun or the teacher and the disciple), both of divine nature, creative, and friendly as brothers, and offer yajna to Indra, most glorious among the generous powers of brilliance and giver of health, wealth and long age, and, holding on to the wisdom of jagati verses, freedom and joy of life, sensitivity and intelligence, bulls of the chariot and the wealth and beauty of life, create, promote and enjoy the sweetest graces of the world as the Prachetas do as friends. 
2135 :Man of yajna, carry on the yajna in unison with the friendly divinities of nature and society. 
2136 :Let the hota invoke and join three divinities of the universal language of knowledge, beauteous, golden gracious, rich and elevating, vast and abundant as space, generous and compact as earth, and offer yajna to Indra, lord protector and giver of health and wealth in life, and, bearing the varied wisdom of virat verses, powerful joys of life, beauties and graces, good sense and intelligence, and wisdom of the universal Word like a generous cow, increase and enjoy the beauty and graces of knowledge, action and piety of life in this world as do the divinities of the Word. 
2137 :Hota, carry on with the yajna and promote life in unison with the universal knowledge of the sacred Word. 
2138 :Let the hota offer yajna to Tvashta, generous creator, lord giver of growth, maker and bearer of fine forms and their sustenance in the various world, and let him do honour to Indra, lord of the beauty and wealth of the world, and, holding on to the wisdom of the two- part verses of the Veda, freedom, honour and fame and the joy and generosity of life like a virile bull, increase and enjoy the beauty of the world. 
2139 :Let the hota do yajna in honour of Vanaspati, lord of sunbeams and greenery, inspiring hero of a hundred actions, golden winged, celebrated in Uktha verses, holding the reins of time, keeping the world to order, lord of glory, wielder of power and giver of life. And holding on to the kakubh verses, freedom of thought, power of sense and mind, dry cows and cows in season, and beauty of life, he may increase, promote and enjoy the wealth and sweetness of life. 
2140 :Let the hota, man of yajna, join and offer yajnic acts of piety for one and all of Agni, the light and fire of life, grihapati, master of the home, Varuna, the highest power of his choice, health and medicine, the man of wisdom and vision, the social order, Indra, ruler and master giver of life and joy. And, enjoying and holding on to the wisdom and knowledge of Atichhanda verses of the Veda, joy of freedom, great wealth of mind and sense, strong bulls and cows, and the health and vigour of living, may he and all increase, promote and sanctify the beauty and graces of life. 
2141 :The splendid fire, the sacred grass around the vedi, and the wide space of the sky exalt the divine Indra, sun, ruler of the world and giver of life and beauty, and, inspiring and investing Indra, the soul, with the joyous vision of the Gayatri verses of the Veda, freedom of spirit, wealth and sensitivity of mind and intelligence, vision of reality and the beauty and dignity of life, bring down the blessings of heaven to the earth for dedicated humanity. 
2142 :Man of yajna, keep the fire burning. Let it never go out. 
2143 :The wide auspicious doors of yajna and the yajnic home bring in, vitalize and exalt Indra, divine air, pure and sacred, bearing the breath of life, and, inspiring and investing Indra, the soul, with pranic energy, health and good age, sensitivity and brilliance of mind and intelligence with the wisdom of the Ushnik verses and the beauty and joy of life, create and promote the beauty and graces of heaven on earth for the yearning soul. 
2144 :The glorious dawn and the starry night, both divine of spirit, exalt the noble and generous Indra, the soul, blest with the light and love of living, and, vesting it (the soul) with strength of will and vision, beauty and dignity, by the freedom and joy of the Anushtubh verses of the Veda, create and promote the bliss of heaven on earth for the dedicated soul. 
2145 :Two brilliant motherly powers of nature, earth and heaven, both loving, generous and rich with the treasures of life, cherish, advance and exalt Indra, great and liberal lord sustainer of life, good health and wellbeing of society. And vesting him with the gift of hearing of the Word and the beauty and dignity of life by the grandeur and beauty of the Brihati verses of the Veda create and promote the beauty, prosperity and sublimity of heaven on earth for the yearning humanity. 
2146 :Rich and generous oblations of refined and excellent holy materials into the fire like fertile motherly cows nourish and promote, with the rain of nectar-like water, Indra, brilliant and generous humanity blest with health and wealth. And vesting the soul with vitality and virility, beauty and dignity of life by the power and joy of Pankti verses, they create and promote the beauty and prosperity of heaven on earth for the dedicated soul. 
2147 :Man of yajna, offer the richest oblations without neglect. 
2148 :Two divine priests, hota and adhvaryu (like fire and wind, sun and moon, the Ashvinis, the teacher and preacher) both generous and brilliant, promote and exalt Indra, the living soul blest with the divine spirit, life and joy, and, vesting sensitivity of mind and intelligence, beauty and dignity, and the fire and brilliance of lightning into the soul by the freedom and power of Trishtubh verses of the Veda adorn the earth with the beauty and majesty of heaven for cherishing humanity. 
2149 :Three divinities (Ida, Sarasvati, Mahi/Bharati), yes three divinities (Executive or Raja Sabha, Legislature or Dharma Sabha and Council of Education or Vidya Sabha) help, guide and exalt Indra, the ruler (Samrat), lord of dignity and regality, protector of the commonwealth of humanity, and, vesting him with power and prosperity, sensitivity of mind and intelligence, dignity of excellence and resounding songs of celebration by the felicity of the jagati verses of the Veda, create, promote and universalize the beauty and majesty of heaven on earth for the people. 
2150 :Man of yajna, maintain the excellence of yajna and never neglect the sacred fire of the commonwealth. 
2151 :The resounding songs of praise and the brilliant tributes of the noble scholars exalt Indra, the great ruler, lord of power and prosperity and protector of the world, and, vesting him with the vitality of body and mind, beauty and grace of person, and the dignity and majesty of living by the sublimity of the Virat verses of the Veda, create, promote and universalize the kingdom of heaven on earth for the people. 
2152 :Noble citizen, sustain the yajna without rest or remiss. 
2153 :The brilliant lord of sunbeams and the forests proclaim and exalt the great Indra, the ruler and the enlightened people blest with the wealth of health and education, and, vesting the ruler and the people with sensitivity of mind and soul, beauty and prosperity of society and the art and excellence of happy living by the grace of the Dvipada verses of the Veda, they stimulate and advance the desire and dignity of the land from the earth to the heights of heaven for the dedicated humanity. 
2154 :Noble citizen of the yajnic commonwealth, sustain and promote the fire of yajna without rest or remiss. 
2155 :The divine splendour of fire in the vedi, the sacred grass around the vedi, and the celestial oceans of water in the spaces of the skies sustain and exalt Indra, generous, brilliant and enlightened lord of life, and protector of the earth, and, vesting him and the people with the greatness of mind and soul, health and wealth for a long age, and honour and renown of life in life by the dignity of the kakubh verses of the Veda, create, promote and exalt the glories of heaven upon the earth itself for the dedicated souls. 
2156 :Agni, lord omniscient of light and life, who turns all our endeavours to good, may advance and exalt Indra, brilliant and pious living soul and ruler of divine potential and possibility, and, vesting that human power with the strength of body, mind and soul, wealth of existence and a grand social order of humanity by virtue of Atichhanda verses of value beyond the words, may invoke, create and promote the bliss of heaven on earth for the dedicated souls. 
2157 :Dedicated soul, enlightened citizen, servant of Agni, keep the fire burning and blazing. Never relent, no rest, no remiss. 
2158 :To-day this yajamana, cooking the holy food, cooking the pudding, and tending and binding the goat for the holy milk of health for Indra, lord of life and wealth, may choose to honour the divine Agni, brilliant scholar, as the high-priest of yajna. 
2159 :To-day may the divine Vanaspati, lord of sunbeams and the fascinating forest and meadow come close to grace the yajamana with the goat for milk and with catalytic holy materials of yajna in honour of Indra, lord of the commonwealth and the social order. 
2160 :O Rshi, man of vedic vision, may the yajamana invite and entertain you to-day with the holy food being cooked and seasoned with delicacies. 
2161 :And may the yajamana and the priest and the Rshi and you all partake of the holy food today and grow higher and ever higher. 
2162 :Agni, universal energy, well-lighted, proclaiming and materialising the ideas and imagination of the learned, consuming lots of precious fats and waters for fuel and, as carrier, bearing the rider at the speed of the wind, take us to the favourite assembly of the divines. 
2163 :qsfr hIh y an h cii-muJh ^<4iH i 3rd reTT WA uhtvi: i|^MH|i| Agni, fire energy, generated and fed on fuels and holy waters, lighting up and opening the paths traversed by generous and brilliant scholars, rises up at top speed to the divinities on high. 
2164 :Scholar of the science of fire and energy, fast advancing like a winged horse in pursuit of knowledge, rise up to the heights of space in all directions and bring Vajin, scholar technologist of the speed of the winds, working restlessly like a restive courser, worthy of praise you are, a celebrity, quick in action and revered on the vedi of science-yajna. May Agni, lord omniscient of light and life, lover and admirer of His devotees, reveal to you the secrets of fire and energy cherished by you, alongwith the treasures of the powers of devas and Vasus such as earth, air and sky. 
2165 :We collect and develop in proper order the splendid fire-energy spread around, vast, great, expansive over the earth, and immanent in all the natural powers of the universe. May Aditi, infinite and eternal mother spirit of creativity, loving, loved and admired by her devotees, always doing good to her children, strew our paths of progress with the energy sought for by us. 
2166 :(By the grace of the Mother Spirit of the world) may these doors of movement along the paths of progress be divinely blest, various and manifold, wide open with flexible leaves, lofty, high and sublime, strong and stable, resounding, bright and beautiful, auspicious, and pleasant for easy movement, for all of you. 
2167 :The splendid dawn and the beauteous twilight, both rejoicing with the light of the day and resting in the oceanic womb of the starry night, and both heading towards the wide open doors of the yajna of humanity to join in the celebration, I consecrate you in the golden glorious divinely sculpted seat of nature’s law in the vedi of eternity. 
2168 :I love and admire you both, lights of the world (teachers like the Ashvins or like the dawn and the twilight), first and foremost to move, riding the same chariot, handsome of form, brilliant in bearing, watching the entire regions of the world, inspiring, measuring and ascertaining the facts of life, two high-priests of life and learning, and filling the quarters of space with light for both of you (learners). 
2169 :May Bharati, voice of the knowledge of the world, alongwith the scholars and sages of the preeminent Aditya order, grace our yajna. May Sarasvati, voice of science and prayer, alongwith the scholars of the eminent Rudra order protect and promote our yajna. May Ida, voice of the spirit and meditation alongwith the sages of the noble Vasu order grace and extend our yajna. May the three divinities of the divine voice invoked and worshipped elevate our yajna to the regions of the immortals. 
2170 :Tvashta, lord creator, creates and shapes the brave hero, lover and loved of the divines. The bright sun as the windy horse is born of Tvashta. Tvashta it is who creates the entire worlds of the universe. 
2171 :Man of yajna, honour and serve the great creator by yajna — through worship, charity and good fellowship. 
2172 :May Agni, in unison with ghrta and waters, moving at the speed of sunbeams and by virtue of being what it is in itself, carry food to the divinities according to the seasons. May Vanaspati, the sun and the sacred Tree, conscious of the regions of the divinities and nobilities of humanity, by subservience to the eternal law, carry to them by agni delicious foods worthy of the sacred fire. 
2173 :Agni/brilliant and sagely scholar, rising and fast advancing by the austere discipline of Prajapati, lord of creation and the people, carry on the yajna by offers of refined and sanctified foods to the fire. 
2174 :Go on, and may the noblest of humanity, leaders and pioneers, and the divinities of the higher regions of the world partake of the libations offered by you into the fire. 
2175 :Man of knowledge of the speed of sun-beams, whether you emerge from the depths of meditation or from the consciousness of the Divine like energy of the wind, first-born of nature, then whatever you speak or do becomes great and worthy of celebration like flights of the hawk or bounds of the deer. 
2176 :The Vasus, abodes of life and life energy, receive the heat of sunbeams from the sun. Indra, universal electric energy, first controls this heat energy given by yama (vayu, wind) from three sources, i.e., earth, water and sky. Gandharva, the sun, which holds and supports the earth holds the reins of the flow. And the vasus, scholars of the first order of natural knowledge, receiving it from the sun, refine and develop it further for use in life. 
2177 :By the intrinsic law of your own existence, you are Yama, controller and judge; you are Aditya, sun and source of light; you are Arvan, moving fast as light. You arise from three because of three, earth, water and sky. You are one with, undivided from, Soma, peace, prosperity and joy. And they say your bonds are three in heaven. 
2178 :(You are Agni, the sun, therefore you have to be brilliant because you cannot be the sun without the light. You are at peace in security as one member of the galaxy family of suns and stars. And you are happy with the prosperity of your own solar family. You have to observe this triple bond.) Arvan, lord of the dynamics of existence, three are your bonds in heaven, they say, three in the waters of space and three in the womb of the sea. Wherever, they say, your ultimate origin be, you declare your presence as Varuna, lord of our choice and lord of judgement and approval. 
2179 :Warlike hero, lord of spirit and speed, I see these tools of the cleansing and freshening of your war-horses. 
2180 :I see the treasures of the beneficiaries of their hoofs. I see the auspicious reins of your power and force which are all-round defenders of truth and law and which protect the law-abiding. 
2181 :Atmanam te manasaradajanamavo diva patayantam patangam. Sir o’ apasyam pathibhih sugebhira renubh i rjehamanam pat a tri. 
2182 :Agni, fire energy, with my own mind and knowledge, I know your soul in body form so close being flown from down below through space to the sun. I see your head soaring up, voraciously sucking the air and struggling to ascend by clear and dustless paths of the sky. 
2183 :Agni, victorious power, here I see your most splendid form eager to win the wealth of food and energy of the earth. Only when your people have received their portion of the food, only then you, most voracious though, take your share of the nourishing foods and herbs. 
2184 :Arvan, tempestuous victorious hero, the chariot follows you. The humans and cows follow you. The power and passion of youth follows you. Multitudes of people love to be friends and followers with you. Even the divinities have watched, measured and admired your courage and valour. 
2185 :(Who can ride and control the tempestuous horse that is agni, fire power of nature and humanity?) Indra, master ruler, youthful and new. Golden is his crown. Of golden steel are his legs moving at the speed of mind. New and youthful, he is supreme. The noblest of humanity share power with him and partake of his holy food. First among all, he alone can ride and control the speed and power of agni. 
2186 :Warriors of horse, with steeds which are broad- chested, full-haunched and sensitively trained, slim in the middle, fiery, superb, of electric speed, when they are ranked like swans in battle array and fight, then they penetrate the enemy defences and clear the paths to wonder victories. 
2187 :Arvan, tempestuous hero, your body loves to soar like a bird’s, your mind moves at the speed of the wind, the flames of your glory are various and blazing, and they range around steadily across distant lands. 
2188 :The tempestuous horse, fast as the wind, worthy of the gods, fiery within and rushing to the heat of battle at the speed of mind, instant like a beam of the sun, is shot forth by the rider on the back, and then poets and singers follow with songs of praise. 
2189 :The man of knowledge, will and action who goes to the highest assembly, who does homage to father, mother and brilliant holy people, and offers liberal gifts of service and reverence to generous teachers and philanthropists, is worthy of highest love and admiration. 
2190 :O seeker of knowledge and virtue, such a person is worthy of company. Go straight and meet him. 
2191 :You are the man, jataveda, light of the day as Agni, brilliant inspired and generous, in company with the noblest at yajna in the home. Call upon the divinities, best of friends, bring them to the yajna. Wide awake you are, harbinger of light and good fortune, poet creator, wise and luminous. 
2192 :Sagely scholar, self-preserver, protector of the good things of life, sweet of tongue and speech, sprinkling the paths of truth and modes of progress with honey, enjoy the march to freedom and prosperity. And, surrounded by the noblest saints and scholars, leading our plans and prayers to resounding success, render our yajna of life free from hate and violence with your guidance. 
2193 :We celebrate with songs of praise and yajnas the greatness of the man of universal honour and admiration and the greatness of these brilliant scholars of exceptional intelligence and noble action, pure at heart, who taste the sweets of success in matters both material and spiritual (on way to freedom and prosperity by the paths of Truth and eternal Law). 
2194 :Agni, brilliant power of light and life, challenging and inviting, adorable, admirable, delighted to be with the generous lovers of life, you are the most fluent and dynamic of divinities, giving and sacrificing. Excellent power of yajna, cherished and implored, come and join these sacrificers at the yajna. 
2195 :Just as sacred grass, old and ancient, is gathered at dawn, in the early morning, before the rise of the day, from the sacred quarters of the earth, grows further, softer and more excellent for the yajnics and the earth, so realized awareness of Brahma, Eternal Spirit, vast as space, is distilled from the inspiring regions of silent nature in the sacred hours of dawn before the rising of the day and, by the mystique of the Veda grows further, higher and more blissful for the pious souls for their rise towards Divinity and Infinity. 
2196 :Just as noble, beautiful, generous women provide ample unlimited joy and solace to the husbands, so may the divine doors of yajna, wide open, grand, all- embracing, provide free access and universal movement to the dedicated divines of yajna. 
2197 :The day and the night, like two heavenly women, wearing light and dark, inspiring and comforting, adorable, great and sublime, wielding and commanding the wealth of the world, may, we pray, come in unison and grace the vedi, seat of yajna. 
2198 :Two divine high-priests of the first order, scholars of the language (of science and architecture), masters of measurement and design, and expert builders, pointing to the directions of the ancient and eternal light (of the Veda) inspire people to join in scientific yajnas of development and construction. 
2199 :May Bharati (bearing the knowledge of science) come soon to advance our yajna of development. May Ida, the Vedic vision, shine, enlightening us like a human teacher. May Sarasvati, bearing the knowledge of the Shastras, come and inspire us. 
2200 :May three supernal divinities of the Word of the Veda, light and inspiration of the Shastras, and knowledge of science and technology, Ida, Sarasvati, and Bharati, mothers of noble yajnic acts, come and grace this auspicious seat of yajna. 
2201 :High-priest of shilpa (science and technology), scholar, inspired and dedicated, offer yajna here and now in honour of that divine artist, Tvashta, creator of the universe, who made all these worlds of existence, carved out the generative heaven and earth, and adorned them with all the beautiful forms of life and nature. 
2202 :Scholar, sprinkling and seasoning the holy materials of yajna, food for the divinities, with honey and ghrta, offer the libations yourself with your heart and soul so that Vanaspati, lord of light and vegetation, the sun, the generous cloud, giver of the showers of peace and prosperity, and Agni, the holy fire, may relish their food seasoned with delicacies. 
2203 :Agni, lord of light and life, brilliant scholar, instantly responsive, ever young, going ahead of the divines, enacts and accomplishes the yajna of the business of life within the word and spirit of the laws of truth. May all the divinities of nature and humanity taste the sweets of the holy offerings of this sacrifices Agni, lord of light and life, man of knowledge, creating light for the man in the dark, providing plenty for the man in adversity, as mortals do, you arise with the light of the dawns and the fires of the generous yajamanas. 
2204 :Jlmutasyeva bhavati pratlkam yadvarml yati samaddmupasthe. Anaviddhaya tanva jay a tvam sa tva varmano mahima pipartu. 
2205 :A very image of the cloud he seems to be when the hero in armour goes forward to join the ardent warriors in the raging battle. Come victorious, warrior, with your body unscathed. May the mighty grandeur of the armour protect and promote you. 
2206 :Let us win the earths by the bow, win the battle by the bow, win the violent wars by the bow. The bow it is that shatters the enemy’s ambition for evil. Let us win in all directions by the bow. 
2207 :This string stretched on the bow is drawn close to the ear and, like a young woman embracing her dear husband and whispering love into his ear, twangs, carrying the warrior across the battle to victory. 
2208 :Behaving as a beloved wife one at heart with her husband, the two ends of the bow joined together by the string may hold the arrow like a mother holding her baby in her arms, and, shaking the enemies with fear, may pierce them with the arrow and scatter and drive them away with the twang. 
2209 :Father protector of many forces, mighty are his sons. His arrow clangs when he engages the enemy. Hero of the bow and arrow and the quiver inspired and shooting forth, he takes on the once organized but now scattered forces of the enemy and comes out victorious. 
2210 :An able and expert driver sitting on the controls in the chariot drives the horses wherever he wants to. Know and admire the great value of the reins: the reins (controlled by the driver on the wheel), those which control the movement and direction of the mind from behind. 
2211 :Warriors Heroes of war manned with strong- hoofed horses flying by the chariots raise frightful cries of war while the horses, unremitting in their force, trampling upon the enemy with their hoofs, destroy his army. 
2212 :The warrior is ‘Rathavahana’, hero of the chariot, and the chariot is whereon the armour, arms and ammunition of this hero are safely kept. And that mighty protective chariot, we, people of positive and faithful mind, love, and wish to ride every day, all time. 
2213 :Let us honour senior veterans of war, of pleasant company, mature and widely experienced, facing and challenging dangers, strong and brave, serious and wise, commanding wonderful armies, trained in powerful weapons, invincible of body, equally valiant, broad- chested and muscular, and conquering hosts of armies. 
2214 :May the Brahmanas, scholars of Veda and divine vision, parental seniors, lovers of peace, joy and yajna- soma, defenders and promoters of truth and Law, guide and protect us. May Heaven and earth, auspicious, pure and sinless, be kind to bless us. May Pusha, lord giver of health and growth, protect us from sin and promote us. May no sinner and supporter of evil rule over us. 
2215 :The army of the brave wears the battle array of a falcon. Its tooth, i.e., attack, strikes as a mriga, tiger, falls upon the game. Equipped with shields and mailed in armour, passionate for the kill, it falls upon the enemy. The warriors there fall upon the enemy in united strength as well as attack in different directions. May the arrows of this army bring us peace and well-being. 
2216 :May the spirit of health, peace and progress ward off ills from us all round. May our body be strong as granite. May soma, spirit of life, inspire us from above. May the earth as well as the sky bring us peace and happiness. 
2217 :The warriors spur the horses on the sides and strike them with the goad on the shanks. Expert teacher, the horses are intelligent and responsive, train them in quick curves and movements of battle. 
2218 :Like the hand-guard warding off the strikes of the bow-string with its coils and protecting the hand of the archer, the expert commander of the army and the man of laws and ways of the world, by the blows of his arms and himself facing the challenges, protects the people from all round and, like the cloud, showers all the peace and comfort on them. 
2219 :Hero and protector of the land and forests, brilliant as the sun, our friend and heroic leader crossing over crises and challenges, be strong of body and power. Committed you are to the earth and traditions of humanity. Grow stronger and expand in power. And may your commander win all the battles for you. 
2220 :Man of knowledge and power, receive, cultivate and socially promote the light and energy emanating from the sun and earth. Receive, cultivate and promote the strength, courage and endurance emanated from the trees. Cultivate and promote the energy of the waters. Refine and strengthen the chariot invincible as thunder and blazing with the rays of the sun, and develop it further by sacrifice and investment. 
2221 :Brilliant leader and warrior, devoted to the thunderbolt of Indra, army of the winds, light of the sun and depth of the sky and the ocean as ideals, in love with the power of lightning, inner thoughts of friends, and conscience of the best man, and enjoying our love and trust, may now receive our gifts and homage for further growth and development. 
2222 :Heroic leader, loud and bold, let the war-drum of action, your clarion-call to the nation, resound over earth and sky. Let the wide world, moving and nonmoving, know you and hear the call. And, in unison with the power and grandeur of the nation and the best of nobility, let the call drive off the enemies farthest away. 
2223 :Thunderous hero, rally the forces with the beat of the war drum. Loud and bold, instil and inspire us with passion for action. Resisting and suppressing evil, let the call resound as thunder. Fight and throw off the dogged enemies far from here. You are the measure and concentration of the power and glory of Indra, lord of humanity. Grow, expand and glorify the human nation. 
2224 :Indra, mighty hero, rout those enemy forces to annihilation. Bring our armies back home with flying colours. The drum, with the flag flying, resounds. United, our men on the wings of horses fight on. May our heroes of the chariot be ever victorious. 
2225 :qualities of fire immanent in nature, so it is the favourite love of Agni. So the sheep is the favourite love of Sarasvati. The brown one is favourite of Soma. The dark one is favourite of Pusha. The one with white back is favourite of Brihaspati. The one of varied colour is favourite of Vishvedevas. The red one is favourite of Indra. The black and white is favourite of Maruts. The strong-bodied is favourite of Indra and Agni. The one which is white below is favourite of Savita. And the black one with one leg white and swift of speed is favourite of Varuna. (Know this, and take advantage of nature.) The bull with a red mark on the forehead is for Agni, front rank of the army. Two animals with white below are for Savita. Two animals with silver navel are for the Pushas. Two animals of yellow colour and without horns are for Vishvedevas. The multicoloured is for Maruts. The black goat is for Agni. The sheep is for Sarasvati. And the fast one is for Varuna. 
2226 :For Agni, sung in Gayatri metre and worshipped in three-part Stoma Rathantara Sama, eight-bowl oblations. 
2227 :For Indra, sung in Trishtubh metre and worshipped in fifteen part Stoma Brihat Sama, eleven- jar oblations. 
2228 :For Vishvedevas, sung in jagati metre and worshipped in seventeen-part Stoma Vairupa Sama, twelve-bowl oblations. 
2229 :For Mitra and Varuna, sung in Anushtubh metre and worshipped in twenty-one part Stoma Vairaja Sama, For Brihaspati, sung in Pankti verses and worshipped in twenty-seven part Stoma Shakvara Sama, charu oblations of rice, barley and pulses boiled in milk and butter. 
2230 :For Savita, sung in Ushnik metre and worshipped in thirty-three part Stoma Raivata Sama, twelve-bowl oblations. 
2231 :Agni: brilliant scholar of science with knowledge of matter, energy and mind, specialist in modes of travel over land, sea and sky. 
2232 :Indra: man of power and glory who is dedicated to the power and glory of humanity. 
2233 :May Savita, generous lord creator of life, expand our yajna of light and action. May He inspire and bless the master of yajna for the achievement of wealth and honour. Glorious is Savita, sustainer of the earth and purifier and sanctifier of knowledge. May the lord sanctify our knowledge. Lord of Speech Divine, may He sweeten, sanctify and bless our tongue and speech. 
2234 :That blazing splendour of lord Savita, self- refulgent giver of light, which is the sole light worthy of choice, we perceive, meditate upon and absorb in the soul. May He inspire, enlighten and bless our vision and intelligence to follow the path of light and rectitude. 
2235 :Savita, glorious lord of inspiration, light and life, remove all the evil of the world from us, and bless us with all that is good. 
2236 :We invoke Savita and sing in praise of the ultimate judge and dispenser of the fruits of Karma and giver of the wondrous joys of life, who makes everything possible, who creates all and watches over all (what they are and what they do). 
2237 :and research, culture and human values; the Kshatriyas for governance, defence and administration; the Vaishyas for economic development, and the Shudras for assistance and labour in the ancillary services. 
2238 :Remove, we pray, the thief roaming in the dark, the murderer bent on lawlessness, the coward disposed to sin, the armed terrorist bent on destruction, the harlot out for pleasure of flesh, and the bastard fond of scandal. 
2239 :Note: In mantras 5-22 in which various aspects of organised life are listed, there is repetition of ‘asuva’ and ‘parasuva’ from mantra 3, which means: ‘Give us, we pray, what is good’, and, ‘Remove, we pray, what is evil’. This is the prayer. 
2240 :Also, there are echoes of ‘havamahe’ from mantra 4, which means: ‘We invoke and develop’, and, ‘we challenge and fight out’. This is the call for action under the divine eye. 
2241 :For dance, the dancer; for song, the singer; for dharma, the active councillor; for social morale, the mighty man; for refinement, the poet; for fun, the comedian; for pleasure, fair company; for indulgence, the child of wantonness; for finesse, the chariot-maker; for patience, the carpenter. 
2242 :For heat-treatment, the potter or metallurgist; for furnishing, the decorator; for ornament, the jeweller; for beauty, the beautician; for archery, the arrow-maker; for shooting, the bow-maker; for the target, the bowstring maker; for marking and delimitation, the string- maker; for killing, the hunter; for the border, the watchdog. 
2243 :For the rivers, the fisherman; for the fast she- bears, the forester; for the tiger-man, the drunken fool; for the musicians and dancers, the brute; for the farmers, the demented; for the snakes and nobles, the neurotic; for the desirables, the gambler; for the retiring, the nongambler; for the frustrated, the cynic; for travellers, the thorns; for the sake of these former ones, keep off the latter ones. 
2244 :Keep off the paramour out to meet his mistress; the adulterer heading to the house of his married love; the unmarried elder brother with his eye on the wife of his younger brother; the younger brother grabbing and encroaching upon the elder brother’s share of land; the husband of younger sister entertaining love for the unmarried elder sister-in-law; the self-decorated sex- doll impatient to make up for lost opportunities; the amorous woman excited for sex; the inmate intending to abuse the house-mate; the solicitor trying for acceptance; the corrupt official in search of gratification for work. 
2245 :Remove the crooked on way to destruction, the small man addicted to gaiety, disease spreading to house doors, the man blind to dreams, and the deaf in love with adharma. 
2246 :Develop medicine for health and purity, help and encourage the astronomer for science, inquisitive learner for education, the seminary for confirmation and application of learning, and analysis and discrimination for the judgement of truth and value. 
2247 :Create, develop and promote the elephant keeper for tourists, the horse keeper for fast movement, the cowherd for nourishment, the sheep-keeper for virility, the goat keeper for lustre, the farmer for food, the soma- maker for vitality, the house keeper for good living, the treasurer for honour and credit, the burser for financial distribution and control. 
2248 :For light, the wood-man, for illumination, fire and fuel, for the horse-course, the water sprinkler, for high satisfaction and comfort, the cook and steward, for a vision of heaven, the scholar visionary, for a vision of humanity, the well-wisher, for the public, the public servant, for get-togethers, the launderer, for happy turnout, the printer and dyer, and fearsome guard to ward off danger. 
2249 :Remove the thievish hypocrite bent on envy and attack, and the slanderer bent on enmity and attack. 
2250 :Give us the saviour for judgement and discrimination, the loving guide for vigilance, the supporter for strength, virile generosity for expansion, sweet talker for love, the horse rider for good news and safe arrival, just commonalty for a joyous community, and enlightened superintendence for all round happiness. 
2251 :For moral passion, give us the heat of the furnace of steel, for cooling anger, the generous giver, for yoga, the persuasive teacher, for moral lustre, the man of foresight, for peace and well-being, the paternal protector, for the ebb and flow of water, the man who knows both and surveys from above, for good of the body form, the man of thought, for the good of character, the giver of right vision, for the avoidance of adversity, the economic budget maker, for proper control, impartial administration. 
2252 :ymd ai y y ysMwriddl <*> i ss yd^ytiil -cryfftruff M ft CJ rEnf^nrTTfiT^ra ry < im rflrcj'fi l~H g<?y < I^f— For the man of law and order, give the law-maker ; for the men of peace and meditation, the protective force; for the first year of a five-year plan for women, a woman who knows how time passes; for the second year, an unmarried woman; for the third year, a dynamic woman; for the fourth year, a white-haired woman; for the fifth year, an extremely wise woman; for any year, a woman of long age and experience; for the experts, an indefatigable man; for the men of achievement, a man of super-knowledge. 
2253 :For the lakes, the ferryman; for the tanks close by, a knowledgeable caretaker; for the pools, a forest man; for the reed beds, a dryer; for crossing over, the knowing forester; for damps and marshes, the man of marshes; for tourist and sacred places, the bridge and dam maker; for unknown lands, the man of self- discipline; for forest sounds, the man specialising in leaves; for the caves, the caveman; for the mountain peaks, the ferocious guard; for the mountains, the hill ranger. 
2254 :Remove the brute bent on cruelty, the nonperformer suffering from faultfinding, the slothful heading to adversity, the slanderer causing mischief and injury, the pessimist inviting poverty, the saboteur Give us the sun and the goldsmith for beauty of form, the measurer for correct measurement, all round capability for all living beings, wakefulness for prosperity, the public voice against adversity. 
2255 :Remove the gambler playing for his den-master, the tormenter of the cow to death, the butcher who slaughters the cow, the man who impairs the cow to satisfy hunger, the man who approaches the beef carver asking for food, the beggar serving his master of the den, and the robber out for sin and crime. 
2256 :Give us the man of original vision for the age of truth (Krita-yuga), the man of imagination for the age of thought and resolution (Treta-yuga), the man of imagination and resolution for the age of thought and passion (Dvapara-yuga), and the man-pillar of the council for speedy progress and development. 
2257 :For promise and agreement, simplicity of language and content, for proclamation, the announcer, for conclusion, the comprehensive speaker, for the endless talker, silence, for loud proclamation, the beat of the drum, for celebration, the notes of the lute, for sentiment, the flute player, for far and near, the conch blower, for the forests, the protector of the forest and gardens, for large heaths and forests, the fire-guard. 
2258 :Remove the flirt disposed to sport, the buffoon disposed to farce, and the courtesan disposed to voluptuous play. 
2259 :headman, the statistician, and the leader who gives the clarion-call. 
2260 :Give us the music of the lute, the drum player, the flute player, and song and celebration for dance and joy. 
2261 :For fire and heat work, the strong man and solid materials; for ground work or earthwork, the carrier on the back; for work in the wind, a man of special strength; for work in the sky, a bamboo dancer; for work on and in space, a man who knows the dynamics of space; for work on the sun, a man with green eye-glass; for work on stars and planets, a man with orange eye-glass; for work on the moon, a clear glass; for work on day-light, a man in white with brown eyes; for work on the night, a man in black with brown eyes. 
2262 :The good human being accepts and works with these eight classes of people of different forms and colours: too tall, too short, too fat, too thin, too white, too dark, too hairless, too hairy. Also they are neither Brahmanas nor Shudras (nor the others). They too, all of them, are children of God, Prajapati. Even the bastard and the ‘despicable’, the wanton, the gambler, and the coward and the eunuch, neither Shudras nor Brahmanas (nor the others), they too are children of God, Prajapati, father of all. 
2263 :Purusha, the Cosmic Soul of Existence, is the soul of the universe of a thousand heads, a thousand eyes and a thousand feet. It pervades the universe wholly and entirely and, pervading and sustaining the universe of ten constituents of living Prakriti, It transcends the world of existence. 
2264 :All this that is and was and shall be is Purusha ultimately, sovereign over immortality and ruler of what grows by living food. 
2265 :So great as the universe is the grandeur and glory of It, and yet the Purusha is greater. The entire worlds of existence are but one fourth aspect of Its reality (just like the foot-stool of a mighty monarch). Three parts of Its mystery are in the transcendental heaven of immortality, Infinity, beyond the created universe of existence. 
2266 :Thrice more glorious arises the Purusha above the created universe wherein one measure of His greatness and grandeur manifests again and again, pervading all the eating and non-eating world, and thence remains transcendent across and over the universe. 
2267 :From Purusha arises Virat, the cosmic form, Prakriti. The Purusha manifests therein and remains sovereign over the Virat. Yet, even while manifest in the Virat, He remains apart and uninvolved before and after the creation and then creates the earth and human habitations. (That is cosmic yajna.) From that cosmic yajna was born the sacred ghrta, universal material of creation. He created the animals, all those birds of the air, rangers of the forest and inmates of the village. 
2268 :From that Lord of universal yajna were bom the Riks and the Samans. From Him were born the Chhandas, and from Him were born the Yajus. 
2269 :From That yajna were born the horses, and those which have two rows of teeth up and down. From That were born the cows, and from That were bom the goats and sheep. 
2270 :The Rishis of universal vision, and sages of universal achievement, and scholars of the Veda invoke and worship the eternal Purusha, self-manifested in advance of everything else. They sprinkle and consecrate the sacred grass of yajna in their mind and offer the oblations in the fire with Vedic mantras. 
2271 :How do the Rishis visualise the various manifestive modes of the Purusha? What was His mouth? What the arms? What the thighs? What are the feet as they are said to be? The Brahmana, man of divine vision and Vedic Word, is the mouth of the Samrat Purusha, the human community. The Kshatriya, man of justice and polilty, is created as the arms of defence. The Vaishya, who produces food and wealth for the society, is the thighs. And the man of sustenance and support with labour is the Shudra who bears the burden of the human family. 
2272 :The moon is born of the cosmic mind, the sun is bom of the eye, the air and prana energy is bom from the ear, and the fire is born from the mouth. 
2273 :The Rishis visualise that the sky was born of the navel of the Cosmic Purusha, that is, the sky is the navel part of the universe, the heaven of light arose from the head, the earth solidified from the dust of the feet, the space directions emanated from the ear, and similarly the other regions of the universe arose from the Purusha. 
2274 :When the saints and sages visualise the universal yajna in terms of nature and enact it in the mind with universal materials in communion with the Cosmic Soul in meditation, then the spring season is the ghrita (clarified butter), summer is the fuel of fire and winter is the havi (fragrant materials) for oblations. 
2275 :Seven are the bonds and bounds of the vedi (altar) of the mental yajna in meditation, thrice seven, i.e., twentyone are the samidhas (fuel sticks) ordained. When the saints and sages enact the yajna within, they concentrate on the Purusha, the universal observer, whose presence they crystallise and fix upon in the soul. 
2276 :Note: Seven bounds and thrice seven samidhas is the mystique of yajna which has been explained in different ways. Swami Dayanand explains it thus: Seven bounds are the seven chhandas (metrical compositions) of the Veda-mantras such as Gayatri. 
2277 :Twenty-one samidhas are: Prakriti (the potential material cause of the universe), Mahat (actualised material cause), Ahankara (individualized identity of the universe), five subtle elements or Tanmatras, five gross elements, five faculties of perception, and three qualities of the material universe which are Sattva, Rajas and Tamas (Thought/intelligence, energy and matter). 
2278 :In Rgvedadi-Bhashya-Bhumika, his Introduction to the Commentary on the Vedas, he explains the same thing in a different and detailed manner in the chapter on Creation. 
2279 :For an average reader, the simpler way to understand is to refer to the seven stages of creative evolution: Prakriti, Mahan, Ahankara, Tanmatra, Perception faculty, Volition faculty, and gross elements. These stages of evolution are the seven bounds of creative yajna performed by Purusha. These are also the Samidhas because each succeeding evolute arises from yajnic consumption of the previous one. And each one has three orders of quality, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. That makes it thrice seven. 
2280 :This is the Sankhya order of evolution, and ‘Sankhya’ is the word from which comes the English word ‘Science’ through Latin in which it is written as ‘Scienkia’. 
2281 :Another way to realise the seven boundaries is to refer to the seven Vyahritis: Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, Maha, Janah, Tapah and Satyam which are the boundaries of each loka or region in ascending order. 
2282 :By that yajna of the mind the sages worship the master of cosmic yajna and realise the eternal and original Dharmas of existence. Blest with the light of the Divine they experience that heaven of freedom which the primeval sages of the world enjoyed at the dawn of creation. 
2283 :Before the essence of the waters was distilled by Vishvakarma for the creation of the earth, the model of the universe existed in the eternal mind of the Purusha, Prajapati Vishvakarma. Tvashta, the maker- manifestation of Purusha, sculpted that form of the universe. The origin of the divinity of the human being too existed in the eternal mind. (That too Tvashta brought into existence.) brilliance of the sun beyond the dark. Having realized Him only does man transcend the world of existence, birth and death. There is no other way than this to the final freedom of Moksha. 
2284 :Prajapati, father spirit of the created universe, immanent deep in the soul, moves everywhere, and although ever unborn He variously manifests Himself with all the forms of life. Men of thought and wisdom feel His presence manifest all round. In Him alone do all the worlds of existence find their haven and repose. 
2285 :That which blazes with the sun for the divinities such as the earth, who is the high-priest and prime mover of the generous excellencies of the world, who rises first and foremost for the nobilities of the world, to that divine light our homage and offer of reverence. 
2286 :The sages of yore rising in vision of the divine glory saw the light of the dawn and proclaimed of that: Oh! the Brahmana who would know you thus ! The lights of the world would be at his command. 
2287 :Beauty is yours. Glory is yours. The day and night like consorts are at your sides. The stars and planets are your form incarnate. The sun and moon are your open face. 
2288 :Kind, loving and generous, give me that bliss of freedom, that supreme wealth of joy. Wish me all well and the world is mine. 
2289 :The One Eternal Lord Supreme is Agni, self- effulgent and omniscient. That is Aditya, all-consuming on annihilation. That is Vayu, omnipotent, all- sustaining. The same is Chandrama, blissful giver of joy. The same is Shukra, instant and immaculate. That is Brahma, greatest and infinite. That is Apah, immanent and omnipresent. And He is Prajapati, lord of creation and father of all His children. 
2290 :From the brilliant supreme Purusha are born all the divisions of time from the moment onward, and all the movements from the twinkling of the eye onward. No one can ever catch or hold this Lord from above or middle or crosswise. 
2291 :There is none and nothing like Him, no picture, no icon, no simile, no metaphor. Great is His Name, mighty His glory. “He is the Golden Seed of the universe”, it is apparent. “No, no, do not kill me, do not punish, I pray”, such is the prayer of humanity to Him. “No one ever born is greater than He or beyond Him”, such is clearly the voice of the Veda. 
2292 :Eso ha devah pradiso ’nu sarvdh purvo ha jatah sa’ u garbhe’ antah. Sa’eva jatah sa janisya- manah pratyah janastisthati sarvatomukhah. 
2293 :Children of divinity, verily this glorious lord of the universe pervades all regions and quarters of space. First born, i.e., manifested, of existence, in truth, He is at the very centre of the universe and in the depths of the soul. Existent and manifest, He continues to manifest every moment and abides everywhere in everything facing forward in all directions. 
2294 :Yasmajjdtam na pura kiiri canaiva ya ababhuva bhuvanani visva. Prajapatih prajayd safnra- ranastrini jyohmsi sac ate sa sodasl. 
2295 :The glorious lord is He, nothing whatever was born before Him, none of all those worlds of the universe which came into existence later. Father and sustainer, abiding and rejoicing with His creation, lord of sixteen powers of perfection, He pervades and feeds the three lights of the earth, sky and heaven, i.e., fire, electric energy and sunlight. 
2296 :Note:- Sixteen seems to be the number of kalas (qualities, attributes, virtues and faculties) which comprise the model of perfection from different points of view. From Prashnopanishad, 6, 4, for example, we learn that ‘sixteen kalas’ means the sixteen creative powers of the Purusha, sixteen evolutionary stages of the created universe, and sixteen virtues, qualities and faculties of both cosmic and individual existence. These kalas are : Prana or energy and the Hiranyagarbha or the universally fertilized golden seed of the universe, shraddha or faith, akasha or space, vayu or wind energy, agni or fire and light, apah or waters, prithivi or earth, indriya or faculties of perception and volition, mana or mind, anna or food, virya or vitality of generation, tapa or discipline of inviolable austerity, mantra or knowledge or the art of living, karma or action, loka or world regions of the universe, and nama or individuality and identity. 
2297 :In Atharva-veda, 13, 4, 47-54, the divine virtues are described as: Shachipati or omnipotent, vibhu or infinite, prabhu or lord of all, ambha or cool as water, ama or energiser, mahasaha or constant, aruna rajata raja or brilliant, lovely and glorious, uru prithu or vast, subhu or grand, bhuva or omniscient, pratho vara or highest and best, vyacho loka or omnipresent, bhavad- vasu or lord of universal honour, idadvasu or lord of universal wealth, samyatvasu or perefectly self- controlled, and ayat-vasu or ever lustrous and honourable. 
2298 :Reference may be made to Satyarth Prakash, chapter I, in which Swami Dayanand has listed 108 attributive names of Ishvara. ‘Sixteen’ refers to an ideal conceptual model. 
2299 :By Him the heavens blaze, by Him the earth is firm, by Him the heaven of bliss is sustained, by Him the ecstasy of Moksha is constant, and He is the creator of the worlds in space. Let us worship that lord of glory and eternal bliss, and let us sing in honour of Him with the fragrance of yajna. 
2300 :To Him the heaven and earth, both constant and moving in ecstasy at heart, do homage with awe and reverence. Under His eye does the sun rise and blaze with light. To that Lord of awe and glorious bliss let us offer our homage of praise and worship with love and faith. Whatever the vast oceans of water, and whatever the expansive spaces, all exist in Him. 
2301 :The man of vision and wisdom sees that eternal spirit hidden in mystery where the universe lies nestled in His presence. Therein all this comes into being together, and therein it falls asunder. Infinite is He, immanent and omnipresent in the created beings. 
2302 :Pra tadvocedamrtam nu vidvan gandharvo dhama vibhrtam guhd sat. Trim padani nihita guhasya yastani veda sa pituh pita ’sat. 
2303 :The man of knowledge gifted with the divine voice may speak of this immortal haven and eternal spirit covered in mystery yet shining in the soul. Three parts of it are hidden in the cave. He who knows them is the man of super-wisdom, father of the paternal wise. 
2304 :TT m oFsMftrtT TT f^STTrTT SMWlPl ^ 'UcJhiPh f^mcnr i ^d m h i>i m i b srrcN;- He is our father and our brother. He is our sustainer and controller. He knows all the worlds of existence which are home to the created beings. There in His supreme presence, third haven of being (the other two are Prakriti and jiva), the divine souls tasting of the immortal joy of heaven roam around at will. 
2305 :Having known and crossed over the material forms of existence, having gone over the regions of the world, having crossed through directions and subdirections all, and reaching the original voice of eternal truth in the Veda by the soul, the man of knowledge and vision attains to the supreme soul of the universe and, one with it in union, abides. 
2306 :Having known and crossed over earth and heaven simultaneously, having gone over the regions of the universe, having crossed through the directions and subdirections, and having transcended even the visions of paradise, and having over-seen the network of reality constituting the structure of the universe, the transcendent soul sees that Supreme Soul and finally grows one with That. 
2307 :In truth of word and deed with all sincerity of mind and spirit I invoke the Lord of the universe, wondrous great, loved and worshipped by the human soul, and, pray for a gift of that intelligence which Agni, lord of light and knowledge, I pray, enlighten me here and now with that discriminative intelligence which the noblest people of piety and senior guardians of humanity value and pray for. 
2308 :May Varuna, supreme lord of the universe, and the scholar of highest knowledge, bless me with supreme intelligence. 
2309 :May Agni, lord of universal light, and the eminent scholar and teacher, bless me with discriminative intelligence. 
2310 :May Prajapati, guardian sustainer of creation, and the generous scholar, bless me with generous and life- sustaining intelligence. 
2311 :May Indra, lord of universal grandeur, and the leader of honour and power, bless me with honourable intelligence. 
2312 :May Vayu, lord of universal energy and power, and the scholar of science and technology, bless me with intellectual and vitalizing intelligence. 
2313 :May Dhata, lord preserver of the universe, and scholar of life-sciences, bless me with life-preserving intelligence. 
2314 :Idam me brahma ca ksatram cobhe sriyam- asnutam. Mayi deva dadhatu sriyamuttamain tasyai te svaha. 
2315 :May this knowledge of mine and the Brahmana fellowship, and this power and honour of mine and the Kshatra organisation, both grow to excellence and grace. May the noblest people bless me with the best of excellence and grace. 
2316 :All the best for you in truth of word and deed. This is the divine voice of the soul. 
2317 :The fires (such as heat, light, electricity, lightning and yajna fire) of this lord of the universe are unaged and unaging, homely, protective and promotive, bearing sacred and fragrant flames of brilliance, purifying, holy white, invigorating bringers of wealth, dynamic energy, riding the sun-beams, cooling and exhilarating like the breeze and a drink of soma. 
2318 :Fast as sunbeams, with banners of flame flown by the winds, the fires arise, each in its own way, upto the heights of heaven. 
2319 :Sagely scholar brilliant as Agni, perform yajna for us, for the sake of our friends and the best people, for the divine powers of nature, in honour of the universal law, and for your own home. (Kindle the fire, develop the light, let the flames arise for all.) Sagely scholar, brilliant as Agni, veteran high- priest of the science of fire, taught by eminent masters, rise like a heroic warrior of the chariot, yoke the fastest horses consecrated by the divinities and carry on the pursuit of yajna relentlessly. 
2320 :Two powers of nature (the night and day), both different in form and colour, are busy doing good work. Both (like two women) separately nurse each other’s child. In one develops and arises the moon, soothing and brilliant, bearing its own bliss and beauty. In the other develops and arises the sun, a blazing radiant power which illuminates and purifies everything. 
2321 :This agni (in the form of heat, light and electricity), wonderful and omnipresent energy of prime importance in this world and first kindled in the vedi by the pioneers of yajna, is the high-priest of the dynamics of existence, worthiest of develoment by joint effort and adorable in the creative projects of life. Generous and intelligent fore-fathers of humanity and dedicated sages of yajna kept it safe in the woods and burning in the light of sun-beams for all classes of their children. 
2322 :Three hundred, three thousand and thirty three divinities of nature and nine serve this universal energy of agni, feed it with holy fuels of ghrita and waters, spread the holy grass for its seat on earth and in the sky and kindle this high-priest of universal yajna to move all round across the spaces. 
2323 :Noble scholars of the science of fire energy generate this power present everywhere from the top of heaven to the surface and body of the earth, friend of humanity, created for the sake of the universal yajna of existential dynamics, creative, illuminated, loved as an honourable guest, and close at hand for the nourishment and protection of the people. 
2324 :Just as the pure and brilliant fire, the sun, breaks the clouds, so should the yajaka desirous of wealth bum off sins with joyful oblations in the fire kindled and raised in the vedi of yajna. 
2325 :Agni, brilliant scholar and yajaka, just as the sun, by the currents of energy and the wind, drinks up the honey-sweets of soma from the world of nature, so should you, along with the sun and the green sunny haunts of nature and your friends and seats of sacred fire drink the honey-sweets of yajna-soma. 
2326 :When the brilliant fragrance, pure and sanctified in yajna for the sake of nourishment and energy, reaches the sun, luminous ruler of the world, then the living energy of the sun creates pure, energising, praiseworthy, youthful, lovable, fertilizing waters close to the light of heaven and showers them as the seed of life on earth. 
2327 :Agni, scholar, ruler, rise and assert yourself for honour and prosperity. May your power and fame rise to the heights. Make the home and family happy and disciplined full of conjugal felicity. Face the enermys’ powers and fix them all round. 
2328 :Tvam hi mandratamamarkasokairvavrmahe mahi nah srosyagne. Indram na tva savasa devata vayum prnanti radhasa nrtamah. 
2329 :Agni, joyous and great, we approach you with songs of praise and flames of fire. You alone listen to our pious words of solemnity. Brilliant as the sun, powerful as the wind, the noblest of humanity serve you whole-heartedly with their power and potential, love and reverence. 
2330 :Agni, honoured with praise and served with flames of fragrant fire, may all the heroes and scholars be dear to you, all those self-controlled leaders of people blessed with power and prosperity who suppress the destroyers of cows and support the development of animal wealth. 
2331 :Agni, brilliant ruler, man of good ear, keen to listen, listen to our prayer alongwith your noble companions of the administrative yajna who carry the holy fire and oblations with you. 
2332 :May Mitra, friend of all the people, and Aryama, chief of justice for the citizens, come and grace their seats of honour in the morning and join the yajnic business of governance. 
2333 :Inviolable among all the devotees of yajna, guestlike honoured by all the humans, protective cover for the noblest divines, may Agni, brilliant ruler and mastermind of world knowledge, be kind and gracious to all. 
2334 :Under the shelter and protection of great and glorious Agni, lord of light, may we live pure and sinless toward our friends and chosen people of virtue. 
2335 :May we, under the care of Mitra, divine friend of life, and Varuna, lord of chosen virtue, enjoy the highest state of goodness and well-being. 
2336 :And may we, in obedience to the will of Savita, lord giver of life, have the divine gifts of food, energy and protection in this life. 
2337 :Indra, ruling lord of light and glory, the saving waters of grace abound like waves of light exuberant. Your worshippers and admirers attain the light of truth and law. 
2338 :Kind and gracious, come like the wind on the wings of light and bless us. You alone, with the gifts of intelligence, bless us with food, energy and victory. 
2339 :The rays of the sun and the cows both sustain and preserve the earth, and heaven and earth give form to the yajna and guard it closely. So may Indra and Vayu, both of good and golden ear, listen to our prayer and protect and promote yajna. 
2340 :To-day when the sun has arisen, then the immaculate Mitra, friend of all, Aryama, lord of justice, Savita, lord of life, and Bhaga, lord of glory and prosperity, inspire, energise and bless the world. 
2341 :In this holy yajnic world of the Lord, consecrate the light and glory of the sun which shines over the beauty of heaven and earth. May all the essences of nature and the best of humanity hold on to this flood of light and life. The wisest of the ancients consecrated and worshipped it, this light and wisdom of the world. 
2342 :Let one and all adore and consecrate that energy which abides firm and unshaken. Self-refulgent, wearing the wealth and beauty of the world, it rolls around. Great is the name and fame of this generous and bountiful lord giver of showers and prosperity. It is of universal character and abides in all permanent forms of life and nature. 
2343 :Pra vo make mandamnayandhaso’rca visva- naraya visvabhuve. Indrasya yasya sumakham saho mahi sravo npnnam ca rodasi saparyatah. 
2344 :All of you offer worship and homage in honour of Indra, supreme, beatific, support, energy and spirit of the universe whose creative yajna, omnipotence, eternal glory and universal wealth, the earth and heaven serve and celebrate. 
2345 :Great is the fame and excellence of those whose friend is Indra, boundless, blazing, expansive, glorious and unaging lord. 
2346 :Indra, lord of might and knowledge, great, honoured and worshipped by virtue of your own splendour and glory, come and join all our soma offerings and enjoy the delicacies of our yajna to your heart’s content. 
2347 :Indra, ruling lord of light and power, challenges the dark clouds of evil and crime. Strong of policy and versatile of working ways and forms, he frustrates the designs of the cunning. Scourge of thieves and grabbers hiding in the forests, he breaks their arms and burns them to dust. And he gives full expression to the voice and actions of those who contribute to delightful peace and prosperity. 
2348 :Whence, where, do you, Indra, praised and powerful, go alone all by yourself? Lord of truth, shelter and support of the wise and good, why thus? What is the cause? Gliding past by horses on the wing, tell us that in confidence, we ask you in so many words of sincerity, since we are your own. Indra, by your own power and splendour you are great, rarely relenting, rarely remiss. 
2349 :Indra, enlightened and powerful ruler, the people who are good and true, who wish to punish those who are cruel to the cow and the self-disciplined man of the wealth of cows, and who cultivate the vast, generous mother earth, sustainer of her many children and flowing with her gifts in a thousand streams — all these admire and advance your governance and administration. 
2350 :Indra, lord of power and enlightenment, I acknowledge, admire and stand by this great word, wisdom and policy of yours which, powerful as it is, emerges clearly in this eulogy of yours. 
2351 :That same great Indra of courage and conquest by virtue of his valour, the noblest poets and leaders glorify with great enthusiasm in festivals and celebrations of growth and development. 
2352 :Brilliant and boundless, may the sun drink the honey-sweet nectars of soma, and bless the yajnapati with life full and inviolate. 
2353 :Going at the speed of energy, he sustains and nourishes the living beings with his own might and shines on in wondrous ways. 
2354 :Surely the rays of light convey and reveal the glory of the Sun, lord of light, omniscient, omnipresent and all-illuminant, so that the world may see the eternal light and glory of the lord of the universe. 
2355 :Varuna, lord of universal justice, purifier and sanctifier, with the eye with which you watch the blazing lord of nourishment and protection, with the same benigh eye watch the whole humanity. 
2356 :Divine high-priests of love and compassion, come by the wondrous chariot of sunbeams, take up and conduct the yajna with honeyed materials of piety and purity. 
2357 :Like the yajna of ancient time, this yajna too is brilliant and beautiful, wonderful and darling of the divinities. 
2358 :Generous and brilliant Savita, celebrated life of the world, and Vaishvanara, vital heat of life, may be gracious to come to our yajna with holy materials and voices of Divinity. Divinities ever young and young scholars too may come to us rejoicing on way to yajna so that they may sanctify our mind and all our life of the world. 
2359 :Indra, lord of might and glory, Sun, blazing power of light, destroyer of the clouds of darkness, wherever you rise and shine today, all that is under your power and control. 
2360 :Sun, benevolent energy of the world, universal eye, you are the light, creator of light and knowledge. And you illuminate the beautiful world of existence. 
2361 :That divine light of the Sun, eternal creator, and that grandeur of His, is positively extended in the midst of the universe as His power and will to create. The same He withdraws (and the structure goes off). When the power is thus disconnected and withdrawn from space back into the centre, then from the centre itself, the Night, the Lord’s power of negation, weaves the cover of darkness for all. 
2362 :In the midst of the heaven of existence, the Sun, eternal creator, creates the form of Mitra, divinity of the day, and of Varuna, spirit of the night, to watch (the work of His own creation) for all. One power of His is light, brilliant and boundless. The other is dark which the eternal spaces hold. 
2363 :Truly, great is the Sun, eternal creator. Surely, infinite is the light of omniscience of the Lord indestructible. The glory, Lord Divine, great and true, is universally sung and celebrated. Lord of Light sublime, you are all time great. 
2364 :O Sun, lord of light and generosity, in all truth, you are great. By virtue of your own glory, you are the ever living highpriest of the divinities and humanity, infinite and omnipresent, eternal light of existence, sole Only in the shelter and protection of the Sun, light and lord of existence, do you partake of the gifts of Indra, lord of the world’s wealth, exactly as we, in the world created and yet to be created by the lord’s might, receive and gratefully enjoy just our share. 
2365 :Today on the rise of the sun, the noblest sages and divinities, we pray, may save us from sin and despicable action. Similarly may Mitra, light of the day, Varuna, spirit of the night, the sky, the sea, the earth and heaven exalt us with honour. 
2366 :Savita, the sun, with his force of gravity and sphere of light revolves (in space), sustaining all its mortal and immortal family in place. By the golden chariot of splendour, the lord of light travels on, watching the various worlds of space. 
2367 :Vayu, the wind, and Pusha, the sun, both as a team of divinity, invoked early at the meeting of the night and day, move through the sky like two parental rulers of the world and energise the waters of life for the good of all these people of the earth. 
2368 :For the good of all the people of the earth, invoke Indra, universal electric energy, Vayu, the wind, Brihaspati, light of the universe, Mitra, pranic energy, Agni, fire energy, Pusha, the spirit of health and nourishment, Bhaga, the wealth vested in nature, Adityas, the various phases of the solar movements of the earth, and Maruts, various forms of air and modes of the wind. Invoke these divinities of nature working in unison as a united group of powers. 
2369 :May Varuna, lord of kindness and justice, and Mitra, lord of love and friendship, be good and gracious with all kinds of favour and protection and make us prosperous with blissful wealth. 
2370 :Come Indra, lord giver of prosperity, Vishnu, omnipresent lord of the universe, Maruts, lords of energy and power, Ashvins, givers of health for body and mind, come and with your presence grace us all and all these fellow humans. 
2371 :Like the ancients we invoke Him, the one self- refulgent Divinity and all the divine powers of heaven and earth and the sky. 
2372 :Protectors and sustainers of life and humanity, come you all with voices divine and all the blessed honey wealth of the world and rejoice. 
2373 :May Agni, lord of light, Indra, lord of power, Mitra, universal friend, and all divines bless us with strength of body, mind and soul. May Vishnu, lord omnipresent, the Maruts, powers of energy, kind and favourable Ashvinis, teacher and preacher, Rudra, lord of justice and punishment, the divine voices, Pusha, giver of health and nourishment, Bhaga, lord of honour and prosperity, and Sarasvati, mother of knowledge, come and bless us and enjoy our hospitality. 
2374 :I invoke Indragni, fire and energy, Mitra and Varuna, pranic energies, Aditi, riches of the sky, Sva, peace and joy, Prithivi, riches of the earth, Dyau, the sun in heaven, Maruts, fastest human powers, wealth of the mountains and clouds, the energy of waters and rain, and I pray to Vishnu, omnipresent spirit of the universe, Pusha, nature’s spirit of health and refreshment, Brahmanaspati, guardian Spirit of the universe and knowledge, Bhaga, lord giver of wealth and honour, and the celebrated Savita, creator, sustainer and light-giver of the world, for protection and wellbeing. 
2375 :For him who prays, sings hymns of praise, and is strong and rich with oblations for the divinities : for him and for us all, the Rudras, powers of justice and punishment, rich and generous people, clouds and mountains, heroes who rise with us on the call to battle for elimination of the enemy, followers of the powerful leader Indra, and the noblest powers of nature and humanity, we pray, protect us. 
2376 :Protective divinities of the yajakas, come to bless us to-day so that I may benefit from the strength innate in your heart. Come lest I feel afraid. Save us from the damage the thief or the tiger might cause. 
2377 :Devotees of yajna, worshippers of Divinity and admirers of the sages, save us from falling into the pit of sin. 
2378 :May the Maruts, fastest powers of the world, come to-day and bring us all the wealth and favours. May all the fires of yajna light for us. May all the divinities come to us with protection. May the food, energy and wealth of the world be for us all. 
2379 :Visve devali srnutemam havam me ye ’antarikse ya ’upa dyavi stha. Ye agnijihva uta va yajatra ’ asadyasmin barhisi madayadhvam. 
2380 :All the divinities of the world listen to this prayer of mine, all those existent in the sky and in heaven, and all those who have knowledge of the sky and heaven watch this yajna of science and education. May the divinities of fire and participants of yajna hear, come and join us on this vedi and rejoice. 
2381 :Savita, lord of light and universal yajna of creation, you alone create the first and highest part of the joy of existence, Moksha, for the sagely nobilities of yajna. And then you alone weave the warp and woof of the means of light and knowledge and appropriate means of life and living for humanity. 
2382 :Yajamana dedicated to yajna, poet and sagely scholar of broad vision and deep universal reflection, having obtained the right men and materials try to join the imaginative man of vision and knowledge and relentlessly pursue the scientific yajna for the development of wind energy, source of universal wealth, universal presence and protection, motive power for vehicles, and energy leading to heat and light. 
2383 :Indra and Vayu, scholars of energy and wind, distilled are the essences and ready these materials. Come with all preparations and pleasure. The drops of nectar juices wait for you. 
2384 :I invoke Mitra, spirit of universal friendship, pure and versatile like the day, and I invoke Varuna, silencer of violence and enmity into peace like the night, both of which develop intelligence abounding in the creation of waters and energy. 
2385 :Come scholars, both of you like the Ashvins, of extraordinary knowledge, sincere and truthful, behaving justly like Rudra. Ready are the disciples waiting for you both, having gathered and spread the holy grass for seats on the vedi. 
2386 :If the blessed and blissful first Voice, well- structured in human speech, were to reveal the breach of the cloud, then, one with the ancient path of Divinity, proclaiming the original thunder of the Immortal and advancing, it would take humanity forward. 
2387 :The immortal ancient sages saw no other messenger coming, felt no other presence arising in their mind than this omnipresent Agni, none before this Divine Light. And they developed and ever develop the knowledge and awareness of this immortal light and power for their victory over the universal battlefield of existence. 
2388 :We invoke Indra, lord of rule and power, and Agni, lord of light and leadership, both compelling in advancement and destroyers of enemies in the battles of life. May they be kind and gracious and make us happy and successful in such battles of living. 
2389 :Leaders and teachers, teach and train this brilliant and blessed young man of innocent and purifying nature, keen to meet and reverence the nobilities of honour and learning. 
2390 :Indra, lord of honour and power, commanding homage and obedience, riding horses of lightning speed, those noble scholars and pious people who invoke you and exalt you with the call to battle against the clouds of drought and darkness, those who call you to battle against the enemies of goodness, and those who exhort you to battle for light along with the sun-beams, and those who join you rejoicing with you in celebrations, with all these, with your troops and commandos, and with your tempestuous friends and forces drink the soma of honour and glory of success. 
2391 :Indra, mighty ruling power, awfully strong, whom the noblest mother bore and shaped as a great hero, highly adorable for instant action and splendid victories, most lustrous and pride of many whom the most dynamic leaders and scholars admire and exalt here in the land, rise and create joy and prosperity all round. 
2392 :Indra, glorious leader and ruler, destroyer of the demon of darkness, come soon and bring all round prosperity for us. Great as you are, advance us with the best ways of protection and progress. 
2393 :Indra, mighty ruler, over all your rivals in the fierce battles of life you are supreme. Creator of joy and prosperity, destroyer of detractors, subduer of opponents, eliminate those who damage and destroy life and nature. 
2394 :Indra, lord of might and rectitude, just as mother and father love and admire their child, so may the earth and heaven admire and exhort you for your power to sap the strength of the enemy. When you break and destroy the cloud of darkness, all the fighting forces of the rivals lay down arms before your power and passion. 
2395 :Powers of knowledge and brilliance, may the yajna and gatherings of noble sages bring us peace and prosperity. May the Adityas, eminent scholars, sages and blazing warriors be kind and gracious to us. The vision and wisdom of yours which abides with us right here may, we pray, be the harbinger of wealth and virtue more and ever more, and do good even to the sinner and save him. 
2396 :Savita, blazing lord of light and life, protect our hearth and home to-day with free and fearless, promotive and auspicious means of protection. Lord of the Golden Voice, protect and direct us for the latest joy and prosperity of life. We pray, let no thief rule over us, let no sinner boss over us. 
2397 :Vayu, powerful ruler, and people, your brilliant forces, trained through discipline like distilled soma, decent men of honeyed culture, have beaten the enemy with courage and yajnic actions. 
2398 :Come Vayu, with them rejoicing, bear the soma and the gifts of yajna and drink with joy the distilled nectar of active life. 
2399 :May the cows and rays of the sun rays protect and promote yajna. May the great earth and heaven, both active and golden generous, makers of beautiful forms, protect and promote the form and function of yajna. 
2400 :Scholars, teachers and preachers, dispellers of the darkness of ignorance, come to the assembly home of this versatile genius and grace the seats of the creation of great literature with your knowledge and wisdom of truth and noble action. 
2401 :Brilliant highpriests of the yajna of love and development, come by the car shining as sunlight and create the honey-sweets of the yajna of science and technology, the new one brilliant as of old. 
2402 :The light of the stars moves in waves, downward as well as upward, centripetal as well as centrifugal. Theycarry seeds of life, replete with grandeur, divine energy itself in motion far and near, nature below, a gift from above. 
2403 :Know and be masters of vitality, fertility, grandeur and greatness, all your own, all round. 
2404 :This light energy fills the earth and sky and heaven, born of the Great Mahat mode of Prakriti. When the veteran performers place, light and develop it in yajna, it is radiated all round. It is kavi too, carrier of the Word and sound constantly on the move, immensely valuable for food, energy and victory. 
2405 :Indra and Agni, energy and light of the world, shining and exhilarating, dispellers of darkness and destroyers of sin, when they are constantly invoked, served and developed with holy formulaic words, hymns, and songs of celebration, they illuminate life and make it pleasant and fragrant. 
2406 :Our children who closely hear the voice of Immortality, may they be good and create peace and comfort for us all. 
2407 :Brahmani me matayah sain sutasah susma ’ iyarti prabhrto me’adrih. A sasate prati haryant- yukthema hart vahatasta no accha. 
2408 :The sacred songs of adoration which the seasoned scholars love and teach us, the peace and comfort which the children create for us, the riches which the fire and wind and cloud fed by yajna shower on us: may the teacher and learner carry on all these as tradition and bring up well for us. 
2409 :Anuttama te maghavannakirnu na tvavah’asti devata vidanah. Na jayamano nasate na jato yani karisya krnuhi pravrddha. 
2410 :Indra, Unmoved existence, inexhaustible, there is nothing un-initiated by you. There is no god existent or omniscient as you. Exalted and most high, unborn, constant and non-evolving, whatever you do or shall ever do, no one can comprehend. 
2411 :That alone is the highest and most exalted in the world of existence whence the awful sunlike hero of blazing power is born. Upon the rise, he instantly destroys the enemies such as darkness. All protective powers of the world rejoice with him. 
2412 :Lord omnipresent, all inspiring, these addresses of mine which celebrate and exalt you may inspire the wise divines who, brilliant and pure like sacred fire, do homage to you with hymns of praise. 
2413 :The noble people of the world are obedient supporters of yours. The treasurer is pious and faithful. And whatever is treasured or hoarded or hidden with the trader, the violent man or the armed guard, all that is wealth preserved for you ultimately. 
2414 :This ruler, taught, trained, strengthened and fortified by seers and sages shines and rises a thousand ways like the sea. Great and true is his power and glory which I celebrate in the priest-like projects of his reign of piety. 
2415 :Savita, ruler of the golden flame, today protect our hearth and home and our people with bold and benevolent methods of all round defence and progress. Protect and promote us for the latest comfort and prosperity. Let no sinner ever boss over us as ruler. 
2416 :Vayu, ruler of the winds and power, come and grace our yajna with precious gifts of knowledge and science so that the flames of fire may rise and reach the heights of heaven, and I, this devotee of the holy fire, inward purified, upward expansive with the flames, mentally shining and spiritually crystallized may come to you. 
2417 :Unto this yajna of life and progress, we invoke and invite Indra, sovereign ruler of the world, and Vayu, universal power and energy, both of benign and blissful eye and eager to come and bless, so that, we pray, this entire human family of ours live free from want and suffering and, happy at heart, unite to act in joint ventures of universal well-being. 
2418 :Blessed is the man, for sure, who thus for the sake of peace and service of the wise and for positive values invokes and invites Mitra, lord of universal love and friendship, and Varuna, lord of justice and favourite of universal choice, to his yajna for the creation and gift of life’s fragrance for happiness and fulfilment of humanity. 
2419 :Ashvins, powers of health and joy, come and join us (ruler and people both), beatify our yajna and drink of the honey-sweets of fragrance. Virile and generous lords and pillars of wealth and victory, come with a shower of milk and waters, neglect us never. 
2420 :May Brahmanaspati, lord of wealth and knowledge, come and bless us. May the divine voice of truth and rectitude enlighten us and bless our speech. May the sagely scholars conduct our yajna for the attainment of common good and rise of the good, and brave and noble people of the community. 
2421 :The moon of celestial hue rushes on through space in the light of heaven as a roaring horse on the wing, attaining the tremendous glory of ruddy gold, darling love of many people. 
2422 :Childem of mother earth, with pious intentions, brilliant intelligence and noble actions, singing and celebrating, we call upon every princely hero for protection and security. We invoke every divine power for happiness and well-being. We invite every scholar and leader of eminence for victory in the battles of life. 
2423 :The great universal Agni sanctified in heavenly light grows with the earth and, raised and exalted with holy food, kind and favourable to humanity, dispels the darkness with its light and glory. 
2424 :Indra and Agni, powers of light and fire, this dawn, radiating, not walking, from the heights of heaven, descends (to the earth), first in the morning, for the moving humanity. It speaks with the tongue of birds and humans, walks on for thirty steps of the thirty- muhurta (twenty four hour) day, and then re-turns in the diurnal course. 
2425 :Devaso hi sma manave samanyavo visve sakam sardtayah. Te no’adya te’aparam tuce tu no bhavantu varivovidah. 
2426 :May all the noble saints and scholars and men of wealth and power, zealous and generous, together be liberal and kind to the entire humanity. May they be givers of freedom and prosperity to us to-day, and comfort and advancement to our children to morrow. 
2427 :Apadhamadab his astir as as ti hath endro dyumnyabhavat. Devasta ’indra sakhyaya yemire brhadbhano marudgana. 
2428 :May Indra, lord of power and ruler of the world, destroyer of cursers and evil-wishers, be the liberal giver of prosperity and splendour, and may he eliminate all fear, violence and terror. 
2429 :Indra, lord of light and glory like the sun, may all the nobilities of humanity, divinities of nature and powers of the winds be friends with you with all their support. 
2430 :Maruts, leaders and commanders of humanity, sing hymns of praise in honour of Indra, great ruler of the world. Lord of a hundred yajnic acts, destroyer of darkness and want with his thunderbolt of a hundredfold power, and saviour of humanity with a hundred safeguards, he eliminates evil and terror. 
2431 :In the rapture of soma distilled in this world of Lord Vishnu’s yajna of creation, Indra, lord of power and grandeur, strengthens the vitality and virility of this devotee. 
2432 :And that generosity of this Indra all the devotees celebrate to-day as the ancients did of old. 
2433 :These celebrations exalt you only. Yours is the glory. The lord promotes a hundred yajnas. He is up on high over us all. 
2434 :The ‘Daiva mind’, perceptive faculty of the intelligent soul, which in the waking state goes far and shines, which in the dream state also roams around the same way and takes us far, that one unique light of lights, that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions and resolutions. 
2435 :The ‘Yaksha mind’, volitional faculty, by which men of action, thought and constancy organise and perform all acts in yajnic programmes of life, the matchless faculty, present in all people, may that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions and resolutions. 
2436 :The ‘Prajnana, Chitta and Dhriti mind’, instrument of awareness, memory and deeper retention, which is the internal light immortal of living beings, without which no action whatsoever is possible, may that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions and resolutions. 
2437 :The mind, immortal faculty by which all this that was, and is, and shall be is perceived and retained, and by which the seven-priest (five senses, feeling-will and understanding) yajna is planned and performed, may that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions and resolutions. 
2438 :The mind in which are woven Riks, hymns of knowledge, Yajus, hymns of application, and Samans, hymns of celebration and devotion (and the hymns of divinity), in which they are inter-fixed like spokes in the nave of a wheel, in which the Chitta, memory and unconscious of all the people, is inter-woven, may that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions and resolutions. 
2439 :The mind which leads people by stimulation of the senses like a good driver controlling fast moving horses with bridle strings, which abides in the heart, which is unageing and fastest in motion, may that mind of mine, I pray, be full of noble thoughts, intentions and resolutions. 
2440 :In truth I celebrate food and energy, might and majesty, justice and piety, and power and splendour, by the force of which Indra, saviour in all three phases of time, destroys the otherwise invulnerable Vritra, demon of darkness, want and sin. 
2441 :Anvidanumate tvam manyasai sam ca naskrdhi. Kratve daksaya no hinu pra na ’ayuhsi tarisah. 
2442 :Anumati, spirit and power of agreeability, common consent and assent, whatever you approve, and whatever you agree is good, give us that, do that for us. Help us grow in intelligence and expertise for good action. Help us all cross the seas of life with success. 
2443 :May Anumati, spirit of consent and common will, have our yajna of positive action accepted among the noblest people, and may both the common will and Agni, brilliant leader and carrier of oblations and investments to the heights of success, be good and generous to the contributive participant in the corporate yajna of life. 
2444 :Lady of love and loyalty, virgin beauty of fertility, brilliant and pious, sister of the learned, accept the holy offer of marriage, take the hand of the noble groom invited, enjoy life, and give us the gift of lovely children. 
2445 :Five streams of sense experience with their perceptions flow into the one Sarasvati of the mind, and then the mind, converting the experience into language, flows out in five streams of expression. 
2446 :(This is the Vedic triangle of Shabda, Artha and Pratyaya, that is, the semantic triangle of language, reality and meaning, which is the mental association of word and object in an integrated mental picture. The mantra also draws the full circle of experience, interpretation and expression for communication of the experience. The central interpretive role is played by the soul through its consciousness, chetana, which is its essential property, senses and mind being its instruments.) Agni, first vibration and spirit of life, visionary light of lights, you arise ahead, blessed and blissful, leader and friend of the learned and the wise. Within your code of life and living, knowledge, action and piety, arise great souls, masters of knowledge and action, visionary heroes of arms, poets and men of tempestuous speed headed towards great achievements. 
2447 :Agni, brilliant power and divine celebrity, living within your laws of life and system, we pray, with your methods of protection, preserve and promote our body- system and the generous leader of our social yajna. You are the saviour and vigilant protector of our children and grand children, our health of body and mind, and our cows and forms of culture. 
2448 :The scholar of the science of yajna, fire and water, inspired to do good, generates rain and fills the extended sky and earth. 
2449 :The child of the Voice divine, seer of the secrets of nature, brilliant and keen to raise men of peace, breaks new grounds in science and creates new modes of energy and power. 
2450 :Agni, lord of light and power, inspire and fill this child of the Voice with light and knowledge to the full. 
2451 :Holy fire and omniscient power of light, in the sanctity of the Divine Word, on the centre-vedi of the earth, we instal you and light you in faith for the creation and diffusion of the fragrant materials and means of life in the state of yajna. 
2452 :Pra manmahe savasanaya s us amah g us am girvanase’ahgirasvat. Suvrktibhih stuvata’ rgmiyayarcamarkam nare visrutaya. 
2453 :We study and meditate on nature’s energy and the hymns in praise of divine energy, we study the sun, lightning and the roaring winds, and we honour the venerable learned and the wise, dear as the breath of life for the sake of scientific knowledge and power, and, with cleansing words and deeds, we pray for the noble leader, a man of holy speech, who studies the Riks for knowledge, hears the learned for wisdom, and worships the hymns of divine praise. 
2454 :Pra vo make mahi namo bharadhvamdhgusyafn savasbnaya sdma. Yena nah purve pitarah padajna ’arcanto ’ahgiraso ga ’avindan. 
2455 :Offer great hospitality and high reverence to Indra, lord of power and majesty, and in his honour, sing hymns of Sama by which our ancient forefathers, scholars of the Veda in possession of the knowledge of creation, singing songs of worship, realized the holy speech for you and for us all. 
2456 :Indra, lord of knowledge and majesty, friends love you, lovers of soma wait on you, they distil the soma and offer delightful oblations to you, they even forbear the imprecations of people, because there is hardly anyone more knowledgeable than you, since all knowledge flows from you. 
2457 :Indra, lord of power and majesty, ruler of the world, even the farthest regions are not too far for you. Lord of the fastest carriers, come post-haste by the steeds at your command. These offerings of yajna have been made for the constant lord of showers. The clouds are full and ready. The fire is lit and blazing. 
2458 :Asddham yutsu p rtanasu pap rim svarsamapsaih vrjanasya gopdm. Bliaresujdm suksitim susravasarn jay ant am tvamanu madema soma. 
2459 :Soma, lord of power and joyous prosperity, formidable hero in battles, defender of the force of armies, winner of light, giver of cool waters, preserver of strength, guardian of fortifications, victor of wars, ruler of the beautiful earth, spirit of fame and honour, and all round victorious, let us rejoice with you and celebrate with soma. 
2460 :Whoever offers honour and oblations to Soma, ruler of life and yajna, Soma blesses him with the gift of cows and cultured speech, Soma gives him the fastest carrier ‘horse’, Soma blesses him with a brave son or daughter heroic in action, gracious in gatherings, pious in yajna, worthy of high office in assemblies, and obedient follower of parental tradition. 
2461 :Soma, creative power of nature and the world, you create all these herbs of the world, you create the waters and yajnic actions, you create the earth, cows and holy speech. You create and expand the wide skies, and you dispel and replace the darkness with light and remove ignorance and sin with knowledge and Dharma. 
2462 :Soma, lord ruler of honour and prosperity, mighty and brilliant power, defend and grant our share of wealth with a noble and generous mind. No one can stop or restrict you since you rule the power and valour as master. And when there is desire for the supreme bliss, help us as physician to achieve both earth and heaven. 
2463 :Savita, self-effulgent lord of golden eye, comes bearing choice gifts of jewels for the giver of charity through yajna, he comes filling and illuminating the eight directions and sub-directions of the earth, crossing the three regions, namely, the heavenly sphere, the middle sphere and the earth, through the seven seas of space, viz., Bhu, Bhuva, Sva, Maha, Jana, Tapa and Satyam. 
2464 :Savita, lord of golden arms, all illuminator, moves the sun over both heaven and earth, dispels the dark and wards off disease. And when it retires it withdraws the sun and, with the centripetal force of its energy, sucks in the world of light to zero in the dark. 
2465 :Come Savita, self-refulgent lord of golden beams, rise and shine forth, energizing, lighting the path of guidance, gracious and blissful, throwing off the wicked, the unjust and the evil doers, and exposing every sin and crime. 
2466 :Ye te panthah savitah purvyaso ’renavah sukrta antarikse. Tebhirno’adya pathibhih sugebhl raksa ca no ’adhi ca bruhi deva. 
2467 :Savita, lord of light and knowledge, ancient and eternal are your paths, free from dust, well laid out between heaven and earth. By those paths, straight and simple, come to us to-day, brilliant lord, protect us, and speak to us from above. 
2468 :Ashvins, harbingers of light and peace like the sun and moon, givers of knowledge and wisdom like teacher and preacher, come both of you, drink to your pleasure the juice of soma and give us safety and comfort with inviolable means of defence and protection. 
2469 :Apnasvatimasvina vacamasme krtarii no dasra vrsand manisam. Adyutye’vase ni hvaye vain vrdhe ca no bhavatam vajasatau. 
2470 :Ashvins, auspicious powers of wonderful acts, generous lords, render our mind and speech worthy of noble action and achievement I invoke you for sure defence and protection without a gamble. Be with us for victory and advancement in the battle of life. 
2471 :Ashvins, powers of piety and prosperity, protect us by days and by nights and by the noblest forms of sinless prosperity. May Mitra, universal friend, and Varuna, lord of justice, safeguard that, and may the earth, heaven, sea and sky promote that prosperity. 
2472 :Revolving with its own force of gravity, moved round and round by the force of cosmic dynamics, lighting the constant and the changing forms of nature, Savita, the brilliant sun, goes on and on by his golden chariot, watching the worlds of the universe. 
2473 :The great night comes and covers the regions of the earth alongwith the regions of the skies. Away from the regions of the sun it stays and eclipses the areas of light, and the darkness remains until the light comes again. 
2474 :Usha, lady of the light at dawn, mistress of beauty and excitement, come bearing that food and wondrous energy for us by which we may beget, support and rejoice with our children and the children of our children. 
2475 :Early morning we invoke Agni, lord of light, light the fire and pray for the light of life. Early morning we invoke Indra and pray for power and honour. Early morning we invoke Mitra and Varuna, and pray for the energy of prana and udana. Early morning we invoke the Ashvins and pray for learning and wisdom. Early morning we invoke Bhaga, and pray for strength and prosperity. We invoke Pusha and pray for health and nourishment. We invoke Brahmanaspati, lord omniscient, and pray for knowledge and vision. Early morning we invoke Soma, and pray for peace and joy. Early morning we invoke Rudra and pray for spiritual strength. 
2476 :Early morning we invoke Bhaga, and pray for honour and prosperity, Bhaga, all victorious, lustrous child of immortality and sustainer of the social system, which everybody — whether poor and helpless, or fast and impetuous, or a ruling king — loves and honours, and of which the Lord of Life says: Acquire honour and glory won by effort and endeavour and enjoy. 
2477 :Lord of glory, lord of inspiration for advancement, lord of truth and beneficence, lord of light and knowledge, blessed us as you have with intelligence, we pray, save this intelligence of ours from sin and lead us to the vision of divinity. Lord of power and prosperity, help us grow with cows and horses, let us advance with manpower, bless us with men of vision and leaders of quality. 
2478 :Maghavan, magnanimous lord of honour and prosperity, we pray, we may be prosperous at the present time. And may we be prosperous at the rise of the sun. Let us prosper at the middle of the day. And let us be prosperous in the evening. Let us always abide in the wisdom and guiding vision of the noble and brilliant saints and sages for the achievement of wealth and other wherewithal of life Bliaga’eva bhagavan’astu devastena vayam bhagavantah syama. Tam tva bhaga sarva’ ijjohaviti sa no bhaga pura eta bhaveha. 
2479 :Masters of wisdom and brilliance, the Lord creator of the glorious universe alone is the Lord Supreme of honour and prosperity. May we be prosperous by virtue of His generosity. 
2480 :Lord giver of honour and prosperity, may you be our guide, inspire us and lead us to prosperity. 
2481 :The lights of the dawn, inspired and inspiring to silence and prayer, advancing like the golden chariot of the sun for the achievement of yajnic acts of love and creation may, we pray, bring us the newest treasures of honour and prosperity, just like the fastest horses flying chariot-loads of a hero’s trophies of victory. 
2482 :The holy dawns, replete with vapours, blest with sunbeams, pregnant with energy and generous with bliss may, we pray, sanctify our home and, bringing showers of ghrta and water, may fill our life with all round prosperity. And may you, brilliant ladies, protect and promote us always with good fortune like the dawn. 
2483 :Pushan, lord of health and joy, living within the rules of your discipline, we pray, we may never suffer harm or loss and, singing songs of thanks for you here, live long and happily. 
2484 :Let the devotee seasoned by honest words and desire come and surrender to adorable Pusha, lord of health and growth, protector of every way of life. And Pusha grants the most protective and brilliant means of advancement and helps realise every thought and intention of the devotee for us. 
2485 :inviolable and intrepidable protector, sustaining the laws of existence and maintaining the sustainers of life such as earth and sun, takes the three steps of creation through the causal Prakriti, subtle materials, and the concrete forms of life and matter. Hence He alone is the lord adorable. 
2486 :That which is the highest stage of human attainability is Vishnu’s divinity. That is what the sages, celebrants, ever wakeful among humanity, meditate, light up, realise and live. 
2487 :By the eternal power and existential law of Varuna, Lord Supreme, are sustained firmly the sun and the earth together, both unageing, mighty prolific, abundant in living waters, glory of the worlds, wide, expansive, full of honey sweets and wondrous beautiful. 
2488 :Whoever are our enemies, we keep off. We throw them off with arms of fire and electric energy. May the Vasus, Rudras and Adityas raise me sky-high, mighty strong and wide-awake to preside over the rulers of the world. 
2489 :Ashvins, powers true and incorruptible, come here with thirty three divinities to drink the honey- sweets of nectar, promote our health and age, wash off our sins and evil, ward off jealousy and enmity, and be close friends with us in truth. 
2490 :Maruts, dynamic citizens of the land, this valuable work of the venerable artist of eminence and this treatise is for you. Come with food and energy for the growth and protection of the health of the people of all ages. And we shall find the food, energy and knowledge for a general tonic and panacea for all disease. 
2491 :Sages and scholars collaborating on projects of common interest, working together on learned subjects, graduates equally competent in reason and science, visionaries of divinity with penetrating senses, mind and intellect, courageous and resolute of will, having studied and realised the paths traversed by the predecessors, extend the bounds of knowledge and hold the reins of the human community on the march to progress. 
2492 :This golden glow of life and health which bursts forth from within is the gift of mother earth. It is the giver of health and long age and physical and intellectual brilliance. It is the guardian giver of wealth and insurance against suffering and disease. May this golden treasure of lustrous victory, I pray, come in to bless me with success in life. 
2493 :That golden glow of celibate life the demons and ogres cannot violate, nor can they cross over and attain it. It is the splendour of the divines, first born of Mother Nature. One who commands this golden essence of the art of life and living lives a long age of activity among the divines, lives a long age of activity among humanity. 
2494 :That golden glowing science and discipline of life which the sages of noble mind and expertise of living hold and prescribe for a man desirous of a hundred fold lustre, I hold and observe so that I may live a full abundant age of hundred years. 
2495 :Just as our voice reaches the clouds floating in the sky, the earth and the sea, so may it reach the eternal Lord of omniscience, and may the Lord listen to our prayer. 
2496 :Also, may the pursuers and promoters of truth and eternal law, the noblest minds of the world, and the mantras and formulas of divine celebration created and sung by the poets of imagination, protect and promote us. 
2497 :These words of prayer sanctified by holy waters and ghrta I always take and offer in yajna with the ladle of faith and love to the Adityas for the brilliant rulers. 
2498 :May Mitra, universal friend, Aryama, lord of justice, Bhaga, lord of honour and prosperity, Tuvijata, manifesting for all, Varuna, best power and highest, Daksha, master of the art of creation, and Ansha, the brilliant Sun, hear my prayers for all. 
2499 :Seven sages, i.e., five faculties of perception, one mana (mind), and one buddhi (intellect), vested in the body, the seven together serve and protect the body without let up and negligence. Of the sleeping person, the seven, still there, retire with the soul into the heart. But two other sages, i.e., prana and apana, keep awake in the body and do not go to sleep. 
2500 :Arise, lord of universal Vedic knowledge, we have come to you in search of divinity in pursuit of knowledge. The most charitable, generous and dynamic people of the speed of the winds come to you. Indra, lord of knowledge and power, be friends, be smart with instant action. 
2501 :Brahmanaspati, lord of universal knowledge, speaks to us, for sure, of the wonder mantra of celebrated knowledge in which divinities such as Mitra, Varuna, Aryama and Indra abide in mystery with their power and secret of prana, water, spirit and light. 
2502 :Brahmanaspate tvamasya yanta suktasya bodhi tanayam ca jinva. Visvam tadbhadram yadavanti deva brhadvadema vidathe suvirah. Ya’ ima visva. Visvakarma. Yo nah pita. Anna- pate ’nnasya no dehi. 
2503 :Brahmanaspati, lord of the universe and universal knowledge, you are the leading light and controller of this world. 
2504 :Listen, and acknowledge our praise and prayer. Love, protect and promote our children. The universal good which the divinities protect and extend may come and bless us. Brave with heroic children, we sing great songs of praise in honour of the Lord. 
2505 :Vishvakarma who is our father has created all these worlds of existence. 
2506 :Lord of food and energy, bless us with food, energy and the power to grow and rise. 
2507 :Go off from here the niggards, the malevolent and the revilers of Divinity. This is the beauteous place of the generous and inspired yajamana. May Yama, the leading light and controller of the world, grant him a place of rest and freedom blest by the lights of heaven and by days and nights. 
2508 :Human soul, may Savita, Lord of life and Law, will and determine a suitable place of residence for your bodies on the earth or in the skies, and may the rays of the sun be instrumental to that placement for you. 
2509 :May the wind purify you. May Savita, lord of light, purify you with the blazing heat of agni and the light of the sun. And may the rays of light deliver you from bondage. 
2510 :Short is your stay in a temporary world. Your nest is built but on a leaf. Live here as co-sharers of existence with the earth, the senses, the sun-beams and the divine Word, and abide in worship close to the eternal Spirit of the universe. 
2511 :May Savita, lord of creation and generation, plant your bodies in the womb of the mother and seat you on her lap of love. 
2512 :Mother, mother earth, Mother Nature, be kind and gracious to this soul. 
2513 :O soul, I place you securely in the beautiful world close to the sacred waters within the divine Prajapati, father of his children. 
2514 :May He wash off our sins and shine us to brilliance. 
2515 :Yama, lord of death and reckoning, keep off the path that is other than the divine. Come following the path that is supreme. 
2516 :Lord of vision, lord of the ear, I speak to you in prayer: Do not hurt our children, do not strike the brave. 
2517 :Sam vatah sam hi te ghrnih sarh te bhavant- vistakah. Sam te bhavantvagnayah parthivaso ma tva ’bhi susucan. 
2518 :May the winds be good and kind to you, cool and refreshing. May the sun be good and kind, warm and soothing. May the vedi and the home be happy and blissful. May the fires of the hearth and yajna be good and fragrant. May nothing on earth cause you sorrow and suffering. 
2519 :May the spaces be harmonious and good to you. May the waters be soothing and blissful to you. May the rivers and the seas be kind and favourable to you. May the skies be kind and generous. And may all the directions feed, nourish, strengthen and season you with love and kindness (for life and death). 
2520 :Friends, brothers and comrades, the river of rocks and boulders rushes on. Gird up your loins all, arise and cross over. Whatever be the hurdles against us, we Sage physician of mind and soul, great as apamarga, universal cure, wash out sin, cleanse impurity, eliminate evil action, rectify sensual frailties, and root out dirty dreams. 
2521 :Sumitriya na ’ apa ’ osadhayah santu durmitriya- stasmai santu yo’smandvesti yam ca vayam dvismah. 
2522 :May the waters and pranic energies, and herbs such as somalata be good friends to us, and may they be antidotes to those negativities which harm us and which we hate to suffer. 
2523 :Just as we employ the bullock, off-spring of the cow, as carrier power for the service of noble people in farming, so may the fire energy like electricity be our carrier over long distances. 
2524 :Let us rise beyond the dark to the regions of light and bliss, watching higher and higher, and reach to the self-refulgent Sun, the highest light among the brilliancies of the universe. 
2525 :I fix and raise this limit and boundary wall for the safety and discipline of the living souls so that nothing alien may encroach upon their freedom and property. May these abundant souls live for a hundred years and by their law and discipline resist death from within. 
2526 :Agni, lord giver of life, you purify and sanctify the long years of our life. We pray, create and promote food, energy and the light of knowledge for us, and throw off all evil and violence far from us. 
2527 :audymHJH ^fcml cfSTpit ^ddnlchi yd^tPAIsr i ■fri ttst w TTscf fad 4 m d y PM'jy h i fa m -h wwt n^v9ii Agni, long-lived ruler of power and light, growing by fragrant offerings, manifesting in the rising flames of ghrta, abiding in ghrta, come and, having drunk of ghee and the honey-sweet delicious products of the cow, protect and promote these dedicated souls as father protects the children. 
2528 :All these, you all, protect and promote the cow, raise the holy voice of knowledge, preserve and replenish the earth, expand the fire of yajna, and feed the divinities of nature and the environment, and who can dare to challenge you ? None! Knowing well (what is right and what is wrong), I reject and cast away the flesh-eating fire. The carrier of sin must go to Yama, lord of justice and reckoning. 
2529 :And I pray: may this other fire of yajna, symbol of knowledge and power of light and heat of life, come bringing auspicious food and fragrance for the divinities of nature and the best of humanity. 
2530 :Man of knowledge brilliant as Agni, for the parents and forefathers, manage the land where, far off, you know the hidden treasures therein, so that streams of delicacies flow for them and their dreams and wishes come true in holy word and deed. 
2531 :Earth, sweet mother, be good and kind to us, thornless and smooth, generous and hospitable. Wide and expansive, give us a happy home. Wash off our sins and make us shine. 
2532 :Agni, lord of brilliance and master of a happy home, far higher above have you risen from this world. May this homely world be reborn of you as a new paradise. Our homage to that paradisal world of bliss. 
2533 :I arise and come to Rigveda, voice of Divinity. I come to Yajurveda, mind and resolution divine. I come to Samaveda, energy and ecstasy divine. I come to Atharva-veda, vision and vibration of Divinity. That speech is my light and glory. That light and mind is my strength and spirit of courage and fortitude. By virtue of the divine, the prana and apana energy is my real might. 
2534 :Whatever the weakness of my eye, of my heart, and of my mind, whatever the loop-holes anywhere, may the Lord of Infinity make up and re-fill. May the lord who is father and guardian of the universe, we pray, be good and gracious to us. 
2535 :With the knowledge of Being, Becoming, and Spirit, with knowledge, karma and prayer, we meditate upon the blazing glory of self-effulgent lord Savita, Lord of existence, intelligence and bliss, the only worthy choice of ours, and we pray that He may inspire and guide our vision and intelligence to the right path. 
2536 :By what modes and acts of protection, by which might and brilliant, current and recurrent power and intelligence, does the wondrous lord of the universe, great and ever greater, abide by us as our universal friend and inspire our noble thoughts and actions? Who is it, true and constant, strong and inviolable, most abundant treasure and most liberal giver of the joyous gifts of food and soma, who gives you and sends you to the ecstasy of living, O dear soul, in search of brilliance and bliss? (The Lord Beatific.) Lord Supreme, be all-round saviour of ours, of friends and admirers, in a hundred ways of your divine protection. 
2537 :Lord of abundant showers, let us know by which ways of protection you save and bless your worshippers with joy, and by which forms of generosity you raise your devotees. 
2538 :Indra, lord of light, power and glory, rules the world. By His grace, may all be peace and joy with the humans and with the animals. 
2539 :Sam no mitrah sam varunah sam no _ > * May Mitra, lord and friend of the world, be good and kind to us. May Varuna, giver of cool and bliss be good and kind to us. May Aryama, lord of universal justice, be good and kind. May Indra, lord of power and glory be good and gracious. May Brihaspati, lord infinite and omniscient, be good and generous. May Vishnu, lord infinite and omnipresent of grand action be good and generous with gifts of peace and joy for us all. 
2540 :May the winds blow cool and calm for us. May the sun shine warm and clear for us all. May lightning, thunderous brilliant, bring peace for us all. And may the generous cloud shower rains of soothing joy and prosperity for us all over the world. 
2541 :Ahani sam bhavantu nah sam ratflh prati dhiyatam. Sam na’indragm bhavatamavobbih sam na’indravaruna ratahavya. Sam na’ indrapusana vajasatau samindrasoma suvitaya sam yoh. 
2542 :May the days be good and useful for us. May the nights hold peace and comfort for us. May Indra and Agni, energy and heat, be good and productive with safety and protection. May Indra and Varuna, power and water, be good and generous with food and wealth. May Indra and Pusha, power and good health, bring peace and freedom. May Indra and Soma, power and peace, bring inspiration for the joy of living. 
2543 :May the heavenly waters be full of soothing sweetness and give us the pleasure of desired bliss. May they bring us generous showers of profound peace and May this dear green earth be free from vexations and full of wealth in abundance. Generous and expansive, may it provide a happy and comfortable home for all of us to live in peace and joy. 
2544 :Surely the waters, full of peace and well-being, abide by us holding energy, greatness, victory and vision for all of us. 
2545 :Like generous mothers overflowing with love for their children, blessed women, give us here in life our full share of the most blissful nectar that you hold for us as the essence of nature’s gift of vitality. 
2546 :Women, cool and blessed like heavenly waters, as you arise for the peace and bliss of the home of the man you love, we would provide for the joy and comfort of him and for you too. And you too create and generate joy and bliss for us. 
2547 :May the heavens bring us peace. May peace be with the skies, and may the skies shower us with peace. May there be peace on earth, and may the earth mother bring us peace. May there be peace with the waters, and may the waters bring us peace. May there be peace in the herbs, and may the herbs bring us peace. May peace be with the trees and may the trees bring us peace. Peace be with the divinities of the world, and may they bless us with peace. May the Great Lord of the universe bless us with peace, and may the Veda inspire us with peace. May all existence be at peace and may peace come from all existence to all. May there be peace only, universal peace for all. May that heavenly peace come and bless me. May It bless all. 
2548 :Lord of light and power, strengthen us for a place of honour and respect. May all the living beings view me with the eye of a friend. May I look at all the living beings with the eye of a friend. May we all view all with friendly eyes of love and understanding. 
2549 :Lord of light, remove the veil of darkness and illusion, strengthen me, so that I may live for ever in the light of reality under your benign eye, live for ever in the holy light of your benign presence. 
2550 :Salutations to the Lord extinguisher of the passion and smoke of evil, to the blazing holy fire of sanctification! Homage be to the Lord of light adorable. 
2551 :May your flames burn up the evils other than our real selves. May the light and holy fire be good and kind to us. 
2552 :Homage to the lord of lightning! Homage to the lord of thunder! Salutation to you, lord of omnipotence, since you alone love, inspire and gather us into light and bliss! Here, there, anywhere, wherever you initiate and inspire us, from there itself render us free and fearless. Create peace, freedom and prosperity for our people. Create peace, freedom and fearlessness for our animals. Create freedom and fearlessness for us from people and from animals. 
2553 :May the waters, pranic energies and herbs be friendly tonics for us, and may they be antidotes to whatsoever hates and injures us and what we hate and disapprove. (Prayer for health against negativities.) That light divine, blissful to the divinities, pure and wide awake since eternity, may we continue to see for a full hundred years, live under its benign eye for a hundred years, hear for a hundred years, speak and celebrate for a hundred years, and be fit and fine in a state of freedom and independence for a hundred years, and even more than a hundred years! In the yajnic creation of Savita, I invoke and welcome you with the arms of Ashvins, currents of energy, and the hands of Pushan, Mother Nature’s power of nourishment. You are the leader of the world and indestructible light of life. 
2554 :Saints and scholars join their mind and intellect with the great, omniscient and omnipresent lord of the universe, in meditation. The One Lord alone knows the ways and laws of the universe, He alone holds the worlds together. This universe is the great song and celebration of the self-manifestive lord Savita, the Creator. 
2555 :Brilliant heaven and generous earth, brilliant teacher and preacher, in this divine yajna of the holy earth to-day I worship and honour you both at the head of the ritual. I welcome you to the yajna, and pray take it to the top of success. 
2556 :Young and brilliant first graduate learned ladies, I welcome you to-day to the top position of this divine assembly of yajna in honour of the earth for the living beings. 
2557 :Highpriest of yajna, I welcome you for the organisation of the yajna. I honour you for the top success of the yajna. 
2558 :Young scholar, so much in advance of the yajna is this offer and invitation to you today to the top position of the ritual in the divine yajna of the earth. I honour you for the conduct of the yajna and wish you bring it to the top of success. 
2559 :Sages and scholars, I exhort you to shine in the glory of Indra. I pray for Indra’s blessings of honour and power in yajna. I invite and welcome you to be the head of yajna in honour of the divines and children of mother earth. 
2560 :I invite you to the yajna of knowledge and pray you bring it to the top of success. 
2561 :I invite you to the yajna of karma and pray you bring it to the top of success. 
2562 :I welcome you to the yajna of worship and meditation and pray you bring it to the top of success. 
2563 :May the sagely scholar of the Veda come and advance the yajna. May the noble ladies, scholars of the Law of Truth and the Divine Voice, come and take on the yajna for conduct. May the noble sages guide our yajna and take it forward, yajna which is good and gracious, maker of the brave, creator of great men and women, and inspirer of the leaders of the communities. 
2564 :Sage and scholar of the Veda, we welcome you to the yajna and request you to take it to the top of success in knowledge. 
2565 :Ladies of the Law, we welcome you to the yajna and we request you take it to the top of success in Dharmic values. 
2566 :Noble saints and scholars, we welcome you to the yajna for meticulous conduct of it and pray you take it to the top of success in the advancement of culture, good conduct and civilized manners. 
2567 :ypsTFy rviiUnH i 'ERsnrd yrarrd vh^T i ■y?snd rcn yj^^d vQujT i ytsiid T^TT t^t vQml i You are at the head of yajna, dedicated to the yajna of Brahmacharya. We exort you to take it to the top of success. 
2568 :You are at the helm of the household, we commit you to the yajna of intelligent, creative and cooperative social action, and and wish and pray for you that you take it to the top of success. 
2569 :You are at the head of the yajna of thinking and meditation, we elect you to the yajnic task of research, discovery and invention, and we hope and pray that you take it to the heights of achievement. 
2570 :You are of the yajna, for the yajna, destined to be on top. 
2571 :You are of the yajna, for the yajna, destined to take it to the top of success. 
2572 :You are born of yajna, trained for yajna, committed to yajna, and destined to reach the top and take it to the top of success. 
2573 :With the speed of the Ashvins and the generosity of Pusha, I season you for the yajna of the divinities of the earth. We want you for the yajna, we select you for the conduct of the yajna to the top of success for us. 
2574 :With the energy and generosity of Indra, I temper you for the yajna of the divine powers of the skies. We select you for the yajna, we elect you for the yajna to take it to the top of success for us. 
2575 :With the light and generosity of Savita, lord of sun-beams, I enlighten you for the yajna of the divinities of heaven. We elect you for the yajna, we consecrate you for the yajna to lead the yajna to the top of success for us Of the yajna, for the yajna, we want you, we select you for the top of success. 
2576 :You are of the yajna, you are for the yajna. We select you, we elect you for the top of success. 
2577 :Of the yajna you are, for the yajna you are. We elect and consecrate you for the top of success for yourself, for us and for the yajna itself. 
2578 :Sagely scholar, for the simple and natural people, we want you. For the virtuous and the excellent, and for social good we elect you. For the sake of happy homes, we consecrate you. We want you for the yajna, and select you for the top success of yajna. 
2579 :We select you for yajna. We elect you for yajna, for the top success of it. 
2580 :We elect you for the yajna. We consecrate you for the top success of the yajna. 
2581 :cooperation, and for the discipline of piety in the service of the Sun, light of the universe, may the self-effulgent Savita, creator and generator of life, bless you with the honey-sweets of the earth. Protect yourself and us from the pollution of sin. You are the light of brilliance. You are the light of purity. You are the tempering fire of the austerity of Dharma. 
2582 :Anadhrsta purastadagneradhipatya ’ ay unne dah. Putravatidaksinata’indrasyddhipatyeprajdmme dah. Susada pascaddevasya savituradhipatye caksurme dah. Asrutiruttarato dhaturadhipatye rayasposam me dah. Vidhrtiruparistad brhaspateradhipatya ’ojo me dah. Visvabhyo ma nastrabhyaspahi manorasvasi. 
2583 :Mother Earth, unassailable and unviolated, from the east, under the rule and laws of Agni, bless me with life and age. 
2584 :Mother of brave children, from the south, under the rule and supremacy of Indra, bless me with children. 
2585 :Blessed home for humanity, from the west, under the rule and supremacy of Savita, bless me with light of the eyes. 
2586 :Universal listener, praised and admired all round, from the north, under the rule and supremacy of the lord sustainer of the world, bless me with health and wealth. 
2587 :Mother of constancy, from above, under the rule and supremacy of Brihaspati, bless me with the light and lustre of life. 
2588 :You are the Queen omnipresent in the heart and mind, protect me from the defilement and pollutions of the world. 
2589 :Man of knowledge, with truth of word and deed, shine as a flame with the children of the earth, mix with them and provide all round sustenance. Save the earth from the scorching blaze of the sun. May knowledge be holy sweet. May karma be honey-sweet. May worship be heavenly sweet. May life be honey-sweet. 
2590 :The Origin of divinities, father of the wise, sustainer of His children, light of the universe, pervading the brilliant sun, giver of light and sustainer of life, the Lord shines all over, self-manifested. Know Him, be with Him, go with Him. 
2591 :Samagniragnina gata sam daivena savitra sam suryenarocista. Svaha samgnistapasa gata sam daivyena savitra sam suryenarurucata. 
2592 :Agni, heat and vitality of fire, burns and shines in the world in unison with Agni, universal heat and light of Divinity, in unison with the Supreme Savita, creator of life (from whom the heat and vitality emanates to the fire), and in unison with the brilliant sun (who receives the emanation of light from Savita and radiates it to the fire). 
2593 :Agni, Supreme Creator of light and life, pervades the heat of fire, being one with it; inspires the divine creative and generative power of nature, being one with it, and blazes as one with the sun, and thus illuminates the universe with His self-effulgent glory. 
2594 :The self-effulgent wielder of the heavens, controller of the heat and light of the universe, sustainer of the divinities of nature, and lord immortal manifesting through His passion for existence, shines on the earth, thunders in the skies and blazes in the stars. 
2595 :Saint and sagely scholar, give us that voice and vision which may lead us to the life divine. 
2596 :Apasyam gopamanipadyamanama ca para ca pathibhiscarantam. Sa sadhricih sa visu- cirvasana ’a varivarti bhuvanesvantah. 
2597 :O that I could see that protective power divine, unassailable and incomprehensible, which is constant and unmoved and yet by mysterious ways vibrates within and beyond the universe, which pervades all the centripetal and centrifugal forces of nature in all directions of space and whirls around in the worlds of the universe. 
2598 :Visvasam bhuvam pate visvasya manasaspate visvasya vacasaspate sarvasya vacasaspate. Dev as rut tv aril deva gharma devo devan pahyatra prdviranu vain devavitaye. Madhu madhvibhyam madhu madhucibhyam. 
2599 :Lord creator and sustainer of the worlds of the universe, lord of the dynamics of universal mind, lord of the universal voice of knowledge, lord protector of the speech of humanity, listener of the voice of nobilities, lord of light, self-effulgent, save the divinities of nature and blessed souls of humanity. 
2600 :Teacher and preacher, may the lord protect you both for the sake of divine gifts of knowledge and virtue. 
2601 :Give us the sweets of life with the months of spring. Give us the sweets of knowledge and science by the hands of Ashvinis. 
2602 :Lord and Light of the universe, for the purity of heart, for the enlightenment of mind, for the bliss of heaven and gift of energy, and for the light of the sun and knowledge of the stars, we meditate on you and the divine knowledge. Lord highest of existence, advance our yajna of love and non-violence among the divinities of nature and humanity and bless it that it may rise to the heavens. 
2603 :Pita no’si pita no bodhi namaste’astu ma ma hifnsih. Tvastrmantastva sapema putran pasun mayi dhehi prajdmasma.su dhehyarista’ ham saha patya bhuyasam. 
2604 :You are our father. As father, enlighten us. Homage and worship to you. Pray injure me not. Lord maker of the world, we are your children blest with brilliant gifts, and we wish to be with you. Bless us with children and animal wealth. Bless us with a noble community, I pray, unhurt and untarnished, I may always abide by you, my lord and protector. 
2605 :May the day, our wakeful state of the soul, join with knowledge, and may the light of our knowledge join with the light divine in truth of word and deed. 
2606 :May the night, our dream-and-sleep state of the mind, join with knowledge, and may the light of knowledge join with the light divine in truth of word and deed. 
2607 :In the yajnic creation of Savita, universal creator and progenitor, I take you unto me with the procreative powers of the Ashvins, sun and moon, and the sustaining powers of Pusha, the wind. You are the generous and gracious power of Mother Nature’s fertility for expansive growth and freedom. 
2608 :Come Ida, voice divine. Come Aditi, mother of fertility. Come Sarasvati, mother of knowledge and spirit of life’s onward flow. 
2609 :And come he who seeks the voice divine, who seeks generation and sacred growth, and who seeks knowledge and progress. 
2610 :Pushan, like the protective head-gear and the graceful crown of life, you are the giver of noble policy for the progress of society. 
2611 :You are the mother spirit of nourishment and growth. Give us, we pray, give for the sake of yajna, sanctity, piety and humanity. 
2612 :Grow for Sarasvati in dynamic knowledge and wisdom, for Indra in dignity and power, and for the Ashvins in beauty and glory of the nation. 
2613 :In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in knowledge. 
2614 :In truth of word and deed, be like Indra in beauty and vitality. 
2615 :Sarasvati, like the mother’s breast which overflows for the baby, which is blissful, and which is a generous jewel box of the choicest gifts of life, is your gift of the Word and Vision, which is supremely generous, and by which you feed the entire humanity. 
2616 :That stream of voice and vision, mother, let flow here on earth for the nourishment of your children so that I too may follow the voice and rise to the vast skies. 
2617 :Happy bride, you are bright and joyous like the twenty-four syllable verse of the Gayatri metre. Happy groom, you are strong and free like the fortyfour syllable Trishtubh metre. For the sake of heaven and earth I accept you both as wedded couple, and I lead you home by the paths of the sky. Like Indra and the Ashvins, promote and advance the yajna fire of the sweets of honey in life. Inmates of the home, perform yajna in the home in honour of the Vasus and rays of the sun which bring showers of rain for the earth. This is the voice of Divinity, follow it in truth of word and deed. 
2618 :Wedded couple, in truth of word and deed we accept you for the sea and the sky and the winds. In truth of word and deed, we accept you for the flowing waters and floods and storms. In truth of word and deed, we accept you for courage and freedom and the social environment. In truth of word and deed, we accept you for irresistible power and creation of freedom from the winds of tension. We accept you for all round protection of body, mind and soul and the study of prana energy, in honesty of word and deed. Surely, we accept you for the science of food and nourishment and udana vayu, all sustaining energy. This is the divine voice. 
2619 :Homage to you, Indra, ruler of power, prosperity and justice. Salutations to Indra, lord of blazing splendour. Exhortations to you, Indra, destroyer of enemies. All hail to you, blest with light and generosity, supported by the wise, universally admired, and wielding plenty of food, energy and power of defence. Homage to you, lord of wide knowledge and wisdom blest with divine qualities. 
2620 :Hail to the lord of justice, master of law and divinity with faith and love for traditions and the seniors. Homage to the ruler, father and guardian of the people, dedicated to social yajna, and himself an image of yajna. 
2621 :Ashvins, teachers and preachers, men and women, in this world, enjoy the honey sweets of the fragrant gifts of yajna from the holy materials offered into the sacred fire. 
2622 :So also the highpriest sitting south of the vedi should offer homage of yajna for all the directions of space and all the divinities of nature and humanity. 
2623 :Men and women, wedded couples, pursue this yajna of home life, society and sacrificial ritual wakefully in the light of the day and raise it to the regions of the sun. Offer oblations to Agni in truth of word and deed. Perform yajna with verses of Yajurveda for the lovers of Yajurveda and let it emanate peace and fragrance all round. 
2624 :Ashvins, men and women, wedded couples, promote yajna with all kinds of protection and support day and nigh, and offer homage to the earth and heaven and to the sun, mover of the wheel of time. Yajna is so dear to the heart, so blissful to the soul. 
2625 :May the Ashvins, winds and sun rays, men and women, wedded couples, protect and promote the fire of yajna and yajnic living. And may the earth and heaven approve and advance the yajna so that here itself we may experience all the joys and comforts of life. 
2626 :Man of yajnic power, grow for the growth of food. Grow for the growth of energy. Grow for the growth and expansion of divine knowledge. Grow for the strength and protection of the social system. Grow for the growth and protection of the earth and the environment. You are Dharma, the sustainer. You are Sudharma, noble ruler and sustainer. You are the man of love and non-violence. Hold and bring the wealths of life for us. Sustain and support research, education and the Brahmana. Support and strengthen organisation, governance and the Kshatriya. Govern, support and promote the economic system and the Vaishya producer of wealth. 
2627 :Homage to gentle Pusha, sweet mother Earth, giver of nourishment and growth. Homage to the clouds and mountains. Homage to the reverberating caves and skies. Homage to the forefathers and the seniors. Homage to the higher powers of intelligence and the sustainers of pure yajna fire. Homage to heaven and earth. Homage to all divinities. 
2628 :Svaha rudraya rudrahutaye svaha sam jyotisa jyotih. Ahah ketuna jusatam sujyotirjyotisa svaha. Ratrih ketuna jusatam sujyotir jyotisa svaha. Madhu hutamindratame ’ agnavasyama te deva gharma namaste ’ astu ma ma himsih. 
2629 :Homage to Rudra who rallies and calls up the Rudra prana energy (for the destruction of evil). The light of the world joins with the light of the universe. 
2630 :May the day with its lustre, beautiful light, join with the light divine. Homage to this communion. 
2631 :May the night with its beauty, soothing grace, join with the grace divine. Salutations to this communion. 
2632 :Lord of the universe, cosmic yajna, grant us a taste of the celestial honey sweets offered into the mightiest fire of cosmic yajna. Salutations to you! Mighty Rudra, lord of pranic energy, lord of justice and reckoning, pray injure us not. 
2633 :Agni, inspired and expansive, this grandeur of yours predominates the heaven and fills this earth with fame. 
2634 :Great you are indeed, most pleasing and blissful to the divinities. Pray be settled in the vedi and shine. 
2635 :Agni, lord admirable, pray create the red flames of divine beauty (and fragrance from the vedi). 
2636 :Yd te gharma divyd sugya gayatryam havir- dhane. Sa ta ’a pyayatdin nistydyatam tasyai te svaha. Yd te gharmantarikse sugya tristu- bhyagnidhre. Sa ta’a pyayatam nistydyatam tasyai te svaha. Yd te gharma prthivyam sugya jagatyam sadasya. Sa ta’bpybyatam nistya- yatam tasyai te svaha. 
2637 :Light and spirit of yajna, the light of your bright flames that is in heaven, in the Gayatri verses and in the house of yajna, may that increase and may that grow higher and stronger. For that all hail to you and homage in worship in truth of word and deed. 
2638 :The energy of your bright flames that is in the sky, in the Trishtubh verses and in the fire, may that increase and grow faster and stronger. For that all hail to you and exhortation. 
2639 :The heat of your bright flames that is on the earth, in the jagati verses, and in the house of Assembly, may that increase and grow wider and stronger. For that all hail and exhortation to you. 
2640 :Ruler of the land, for the protection of the people and advancement of the nation, protect and promote the Brahmana body of education and research. Protect and strengthen the Kshatra body of defence and administration. And all the people and we too support and follow you as a matter of discipline and Raja- Dharma for the achievement of new and newer forms of wealth and well-being. 
2641 :Ruler, head of the national yajna of governance and administration, well-armed you are all round in the four directions. Centre-hold of the law and the body- politic, you are expansive (omnipresent, as if, through the system). Universally popular, may you attain to full age to protect and promote us. Celebrated head of universal development and friend of all, may you live a full age of dignity for us. We reject hate and hostility, crooked opposition and those committed to contrary values. 
2642 :Gharmaitatte purisam tena vardhasva ca ca pyayasva. Vardhislmahi ca vayama ca pyasisimahi. 
2643 :Dharma, brilliant ruler and high-priest of this blazing yajna, this nation and this yajna is the measure of your power and potential. Grow by it and attain to your full stature. And may we too grow by it and rise to our full national honour and glory. 
2644 :Agni, brilliant light of cosmic yajna, roaring with thunder, showering with the clouds, shooting as lightning, great and glorious, universal friend, bright and beautiful, and blazing with the sun is a jewel treasure of wealth deep as the oceans of space. 
2645 :Sumitriyd na ’dpa ’osadhayah santu durmi- triyastasmai santu yo ’sman dvesti yam ca vayam dvismah. 
2646 :May the herbs and waters and the pranic energies they bear be efficacious as good friends to us, and may they carry strong antidotes for those negativities that injure us and which we hate to suffer. 
2647 :High and higher beyond the dark, looking up to the heavens, let us rise and reach to the sun, bright and blazing, light supreme among the stars of the universe. 
2648 :Lord of the universe, you are the fire. You are the fuel. You are the furnace. You are the light and you are the radiation. 
2649 :Radiate that fire and splendour unto me. May we grow intense radiant by the blaze of that light and fire divine. 
2650 :Indra, lord of fire and splendour, as far as the heaven and earth abound, as far as the seven seas of space roll on, that far do I hold on to that immortal zone of power and splendour and receive it unto me intact and indestructible with all my strength and energy. 
2651 :That expansive power in me, that yajnic efficiency of action like threefold passion of fire, lightning and the sun shines in me with the immanence of light, omniscience and cosmic power of Infinity. 
2652 :From the milk of cosmic plenty, vitality is received. We receive the shower of that vitality rising in abudance year by year. 
2653 :Lord of infinite peace and joy, for the human observance and extension of your cosmic yajna I am one with your light and splendour, lord of omnipotence and bliss of life. And having invoked and fed the fire of yajna, inspired and sanctified by the holy fire, I taste the honey-sweets of yajna raised by the waves of Indra’s energy, and consumed, revitalized and showered by the sun, father and guardian of the children of divinity. 
2654 :This oblation is for the pranas, companions of the soul, (at the end of life when the pranas merge with the universal prana). This oblation is for the earth. This is for the fire. This is for the sky. This is for the air. This is for the heaven. This is for the sun. 
2655 :This is the end of life in truth of word and deed. (The divinities of nature take their portion of the temporal existence of the human being when death overtakes life.) This oblation is for the quarters of space, this is for the moon, this is for the nakshatra stars, this is for the waters, this is for the seas, this is for the navel, this This oblation is for speech and its purity, this is for the breath of one nostril, this is for the breath of the other, this is for the sight of one eye, this is for the sight of the other, this is for the hearing by one ear, this is for the other. 
2656 :May I get the sanctified will and resolution of the mind. May I get the divine truth of speech. May I beget the beautiful forms of living beings. May I get the sweet vitality and taste of food. May all these and honour, beauty and grace be vested in me in life again and again. 
2657 :Jiva, the soul, nourishing and supporting life, is prajapati, guardian of life. Fully provided and prosperous, it is Samrat, brilliant and sovereign. Well- positioned in society, it is vaishhvadeva, a human divinity. High and distinguished it is gharma, yajnic fire. Risen to the heights, it is teja, splendour. Sanctified and initiated in water, it is ashvina, blessed with pranic energy. Abundant and generous, it is paushna, child of the sun. Destroyer of enemies, it is maruta, of the winds. Developing waters, it is maitra, generous and friendly. Moving tempestuously, it is of the air, flying and floating. Kindled and challenged, it is fiery. Invoked and invited, it is vak, voice of divinity. 
2658 :When the soul leaves the body, on the first stage it goes to Savita, the sun, to Agni on the second, to Vayu on the third, to Aditya on the fourth, to Chandrama on the fifth, to Ritu on the sixth, to Maruts on the seventh, to Brihaspati on the eighth, to Mitra on the nineth, to Varuna on the tenth, to Indra on the eleventh, and to Vishvedevas on the twelfth. 
2659 :According to its nature and action, the soul after death is violent or peaceful, fearful or fearless, dark or bright, roaring or quiet, patient or impatient, cooperative or non-cooperative, disruptive or concentrative, (and is reborn in an appropriate form). 
2660 :The soul comes to attain and hold Agni by the heart, electric energy by the front part of the heart, Pashupati Shiva by the whole heart, the kind Shiva by the liver, the fearsome Shiva by sides of the heart, ruling power by righteous anger, the great lord by ribs on both sides of the chest, heat and light of spirits by the intestines, manly excellence by the ventricles of the heart. 
2661 :The soul comes to have hypertension by the blood, friendliness by noble thoughts and values, violence by negative thoughts and values, honour and power by good conduct, strong people by power, good people and success by love and cheerfulness. Sweetness of the throat is the seat of praise and social appreciation. Inside of the ribs is the seat of Rudra. The liver is the seat of Mahadeva. The intestines are the seat of strength. The arteries of the heart are the seat of Pashupati. 
2662 :This oblation is for the hair in parts of the body, this is for the hair of the whole body. This is for the skin in parts, this for the whole. This is for blood in the parts, this for the whole. This is for the fat in the parts, this for the whole. This is for the flesh in parts, this for the whole. This is for the tendons, this for the nerves. This is for single bones, this for all. This is for the marrow in the parts, this is for the whole marrow in the body. This is for the semen. This is for the anus. 
2663 :In all truth of word and deed and in all commitment to faith: homage to the spirit of new attainment, to effort for the new attainment, to balance and peace in the effort and attainment, to success in various new attainments, to effort for rising higher and higher, to purify and purification of the body, mind and soul. 
2664 :Homage to the purifier, to the light of purification, and all hail to the body, mind and soul for the intake of purity from the process of purification. 
2665 :In all truth of word and deed and in all commitment to faith : homage to the fire of purification, to the soul in the crucibles of purification, to the soul receiving the light of purification, to the soul purified and redeemed, to the heat and light of the new day, to purity from pollution and evil, to disintegration of body and release of the soul, to penitence and selfintrospection, and homage to new health and new happiness. 
2666 :In truth of word and deed and faith, homage to Yama, lord of justice and reckoning. Homage to Antaka, transcendent time that ends up everything in existence. Homage to Death that consumes all that is born. Homage to Brahma, the Supreme. Homage to the migration of the soul. Homage to the divinities of existence. Homage to Heaven and to Mother Earth. 
2667 :All this that is, moving in the moving universe, is pervaded by the Ruling Lord of Existence. Therefore, live it as given by Him, enjoy it objectively in a spirit of detachment. Covet not anyone’s wealth. It belongs to none (except to the Lord). 
2668 :Only doing one’s duty here should everyone wish to live for a full hundred years. Only this way—there is no other way—Karma does not smear the soul of man within. 
2669 :Surely after death and even while living, demonical souls sunk in darkness who kill their conscience and live only a physical existence (void of virtue) go to those sunless regions of the world which are covered in the impenetrable darkness of sufferance. 
2670 :Brahma is constant, unmoving, One and only One, without a second, and faster than the mind. The mind and senses cannot attain to It, although It is present everywhere, already and always. Though still, It surpasses and transcends others who are at the fastest move in nature. Within It the wind holds the waters of the universe. Within the Divine Presence the soul performs its actions. (If somthing moves faster than the velocity of light, it becomes omnipresent. And what is omnipresent, is still too, because there is no space to move through.) It moves, yet It does not move, (being omnipresent). It is at the farthest of space, even farther, and It is at the nearest. It is within this all, and surely It is outside of all this. 
2671 :One who sees all the forms of existence existing within the Supreme Soul, and the Supreme Soul immanent in all the forms of being, suffers from no doubt or illusion (and holds on to faith). 
2672 :In the state of knowledge wherein the knower knows all the forms of being as pervaded by the same One Soul, how can there be any illusion or suffering for the person who sees the same Unity in existence everywhere. 
2673 :The Supreme Soul is omnipresent, omnipotent, without body, without any flaw, without sinews, pure, sinless, visionary poetic creator and omniscient, existent in the heart and mind of all, transcendent, self-existent, who for the infinite ages of eternity creates, organises, reveals and sustains all the forms of existence as they are and ought to be. 
2674 :Down into the darkest dark do they fall who worship only the primordial prakriti. Still deeper and darker do they fall who worship only the existential forms and are lost therein. 
2675 :Different is the result, they say, from primordial prakriti, and different is the result, they say, from the existential forms. This have we heard from the Wise who revealed it to us. 
2676 :One who knows the immortal/constant primordial and the mortal/mutable existential and knows that Supreme Spirit along with both, masters the facts of death by the mortal and realizes the immortal by the primordial. 
2677 :Down into the darkest dark do they fall who worship Avidya, i.e., illusion, or mere karma (action). Still deeper, and darker do they fall who are lost in Vidya, i.e., knowledge without reference to karma or the reality content of it. 
2678 :Different is the result of Vidya, they say, and different is the result of Avidya, they say. This we have heard from the wise who revealed the difference of both to us. 
2679 :One who knows Vidya, i.e., the constant reality and the knowledge of it, and Avidya, i.e., illusion, for what it really is, and Karma including the order of change, and knows that Supreme Spirit along with both Vidya and Avidya, masters the reality and meaning of death by Avidya, and realises Immortality by Vidya. 
2680 :The end of the body is ash. The prana-vayu merges with the cosmic energy. And this soul is immortal. 
2681 :O soul, remember Om, Supreme Soul of Existence. Agent of Karma, remember your karma. Remember both these to realise your real form and potential. 
2682 :Ague nay a supatha raye’asman visvani dev a vayunani vidvdn. Yuyodhyasmajjuhuranameno bhuyistham te nama uktim vidhema. 
2683 :Agni, brilliant lord omniscient of all the laws and ways of existence, lead us to the wealth of life by the right path of honesty and simplicity. Remove from us all sin and crookedness. We sing the most joyous songs of celebration in praise of you. Homage to you again and again. 
2684 :The face of truth is covered by a golden veil. The veil is removed by the Lord of golden glory. 
2685 :The life and light that shines in the sun is that Supreme Purusha. That is there, and that is here in me. 
2686 :Om is the saviour. Om is Brahma, Brahma is infinite, sublime. 
